<h2>THE MANTLE</h2>

<p class="no-indent"><span class="small-caps">In</span> a certain Russian ministerial department<span style="white-space: nowrap;">&mdash;&mdash;</span></p>

<p>But it is perhaps better that I do not mention
which department it was. There are in the
whole of Russia no persons more sensitive than
Government officials. Each of them believes if
he is annoyed in any way, that the whole official
class is insulted in his person.</p>

<p>Recently an Isprawnik (country magistrate)&mdash;I
do not know of which town&mdash;is said to have
drawn up a report with the object of showing
that, ignoring Government orders, people were
speaking of Isprawniks in terms of contempt. In
order to prove his assertions, he forwarded with
his report a bulky work of fiction, in which on
about every tenth page an Isprawnik appeared
generally in a drunken condition.</p>

<p>In order therefore to avoid any unpleasantness,
I will not definitely indicate the department
in which the scene of my story is laid, and
will rather say &ldquo;in a certain chancellery.&rdquo;</p>

<p>Well, in a certain chancellery there was a
certain man who, as I cannot deny, was not of
an attractive appearance. He was short, had a

face marked with smallpox, was rather bald in
front, and his forehead and cheeks were deeply
lined with furrows&mdash;to say nothing of other
physical imperfections. Such was the outer
aspect of our hero, as produced by the St Petersburg
climate.</p>

<p>As regards his official rank&mdash;for with us
Russians the official rank must always be given&mdash;he
was what is usually known as a permanent
titular councillor, one of those unfortunate beings
who, as is well known, are made a butt of by
various authors who have the bad habit of
attacking people who cannot defend themselves.</p>

<p>Our hero's family name was Bashmatchkin;
his baptismal name Akaki Akakievitch. Perhaps
the reader may think this name somewhat
strange and far-fetched, but he can be assured
that it is not so, and that circumstances so
arranged it that it was quite impossible to give
him any other name.</p>

<p>This happened in the following way. Akaki
Akakievitch was born, if I am not mistaken, on
the night of the 23rd of March. His deceased
mother, the wife of an official and a very good
woman, immediately made proper arrangements
for his baptism. When the time came,
she was lying on the bed before the door. At
her right hand stood the godfather, Ivan Ivanovitch
Jeroshkin, a very important person, who
was registrar of the senate; at her left, the godmother

Anna Semenovna Byelobrushkova, the
wife of a police inspector, a woman of rare
virtues.</p>

<p>Three names were suggested to the mother
from which to choose one for the child&mdash;Mokuja,
Sossuja, or Khozdazat.</p>

<p>&ldquo;No,&rdquo; she said, &ldquo;I don't like such names.&rdquo;</p>

<p>In order to meet her wishes, the church calendar
was opened in another place, and the names
Triphiliy, Dula, and Varakhasiy were found.</p>

<p>&ldquo;This is a punishment from heaven,&rdquo; said the
mother. &ldquo;What sort of names are these! I
never heard the like! If it had been Varadat
or Varukh, but Triphiliy and Varakhasiy!&rdquo;</p>

<p>They looked again in the calendar and found
Pavsikakhiy and Vakhtisiy.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Now I see,&rdquo; said the mother, &ldquo;this is
plainly fate. If there is no help for it, then he
had better take his father's name, which was
Akaki.&rdquo;</p>

<p>So the child was called Akaki Akakievitch.
It was baptised, although it wept and cried and
made all kinds of grimaces, as though it had a
presentiment that it would one day be a titular
councillor.</p>

<p>We have related all this so conscientiously that
the reader himself might be convinced that it
was impossible for the little Akaki to receive any
other name. When and how he entered the
chancellery and who appointed him, no one

could remember. However many of his superiors
might come and go, he was always seen in the
same spot, in the same attitude, busy with the
same work, and bearing the same title; so that
people began to believe he had come into the
world just as he was, with his bald forehead and
official uniform.</p>

<p>In the chancellery where he worked, no kind
of notice was taken of him. Even the office
attendants did not rise from their seats when he
entered, nor look at him; they took no more
notice than if a fly had flown through the room.
His superiors treated him in a coldly despotic
manner. The assistant of the head of the
department, when he pushed a pile of papers
under his nose, did not even say &ldquo;Please copy
those,&rdquo; or &ldquo;There is something interesting for
you,&rdquo; or make any other polite remark such as
well-educated officials are in the habit of doing.
But Akaki took the documents, without worrying
himself whether they had the right to hand them
over to him or not, and straightway set to work
to copy them.</p>

<p>His young colleagues made him the butt of
their ridicule and their elegant wit, so far as
officials can be said to possess any wit. They
did not scruple to relate in his presence various
tales of their own invention regarding his manner
of life and his landlady, who was seventy years
old. They declared that she beat him, and

inquired of him when he would lead her to the
marriage altar. Sometimes they let a shower
of scraps of paper fall on his head, and told him
they were snowflakes.</p>

<p>But Akaki Akakievitch made no answer to
all these attacks; he seemed oblivious of their
presence. His work was not affected in the
slightest degree; during all these interruptions
he did not make a single error in copying. Only
when the horse-play grew intolerable, when he
was held by the arm and prevented writing, he
would say &ldquo;Do leave me alone! Why do you
always want to disturb me at work?&rdquo; There
was something peculiarly pathetic in these words
and the way in which he uttered them.</p>

<p>One day it happened that when a young clerk,
who had been recently appointed to the chancellery,
prompted by the example of the others,
was playing him some trick, he suddenly seemed
arrested by something in the tone of Akaki's
voice, and from that moment regarded the old
official with quite different eyes. He felt as though
some supernatural power drew him away from
the colleagues whose acquaintance he had made
here, and whom he had hitherto regarded as
well-educated, respectable men, and alienated
him from them. Long afterwards, when surrounded
by gay companions, he would see the
figure of the poor little councillor and hear the
words &ldquo;Do leave me alone! Why will you

always disturb me at work?&rdquo; Along with these
words, he also heard others: &ldquo;Am I not your
brother?&rdquo; On such occasions the young man
would hide his face in his hands, and think how
little humane feeling after all was to be found in
men's hearts; how much coarseness and cruelty
was to be found even in the educated and those
who were everywhere regarded as good and
honourable men.</p>

<p>Never was there an official who did his
work so zealously as Akaki Akakievitch. &ldquo;Zealously,&rdquo;
do I say? He worked with a passionate
love of his task. While he copied official documents,
a world of varied beauty rose before
his eyes. His delight in copying was legible in
his face. To form certain letters afforded him
special satisfaction, and when he came to them
he was quite another man; he began to smile,
his eyes sparkled, and he pursed up his lips, so
that those who knew him could see by his face
which letters he was working at.</p>

<p>Had he been rewarded according to his zeal,
he would perhaps&mdash;to his own astonishment&mdash;have
been raised to the rank of civic councillor.
However, he was not destined, as his colleagues
expressed it, to wear a cross at his buttonhole,
but only to get hæmorrhoids by leading a too
sedentary life.</p>

<p>For the rest, I must mention that on one
occasion he attracted a certain amount of attention.

A director, who was a kindly man and
wished to reward him for his long service,
ordered that he should be entrusted with a task
more important than the documents which he
usually had to copy. This consisted in preparing
a report for a court, altering the headings of
various documents, and here and there changing
the first personal pronoun into the third.</p>

<p>Akaki undertook the work; but it confused
and exhausted him to such a degree that the
sweat ran from his forehead and he at last
exclaimed: &ldquo;No! Please give me again something
to copy.&rdquo; From that time he was allowed
to continue copying to his life's end.</p>

<p>Outside this copying nothing appeared to exist
for him. He did not even think of his clothes.
His uniform, which was originally green, had
acquired a reddish tint. The collar was so
narrow and so tight that his neck, although of
average length, stretched far out of it, and
appeared extraordinarily long, just like those of
the cats with movable heads, which are carried
about on trays and sold to the peasants in Russian
villages.</p>

<p>Something was always sticking to his clothes&mdash;a
piece of thread, a fragment of straw which had
been flying about, etc. Moreover he seemed
to have a special predilection for passing under
windows just when something not very clean was
being thrown out of them, and therefore he

constantly carried about on his hat pieces of
orange-peel and such refuse. He never took
any notice of what was going on in the streets,
in contrast to his colleagues who were always
watching people closely and whom nothing delighted
more than to see someone walking along
on the opposite pavement with a rent in his
trousers.</p>

<p>But Akaki Akakievitch saw nothing but the
clean, regular lines of his copies before him;
and only when he collided suddenly with a
horse's nose, which blew its breath noisily in his
face, did the good man observe that he was not
sitting at his writing-table among his neat duplicates,
but walking in the middle of the street.</p>

<p>When he arrived home, he sat down at once
to supper, ate his cabbage-soup hurriedly, and
then, without taking any notice how it tasted, a
slice of beef with garlic, together with the flies
and any other trifles which happened to be
lying on it. As soon as his hunger was satisfied,
he set himself to write, and began to copy
the documents which he had brought home with
him. If he happened to have no official documents
to copy, he copied for his own satisfaction
political letters, not for their more or less grand
style but because they were directed to some
high personage.</p>

<p>When the grey St Petersburg sky is darkened
by the veil of night, and the whole of officialdom

has finished its dinner according to its gastronomical
inclinations or the depth of its purse&mdash;when
all recover themselves from the perpetual
scratching of bureaucratic pens, and all the cares
and business with which men so often needlessly
burden themselves, they devote the evening to
recreation. One goes to the theatre; another
roams about the streets, inspecting toilettes;
another whispers flattering words to some young
girl who has risen like a star in his modest official
circle. Here and there one visits a colleague in
his third or fourth story flat, consisting of two
rooms with an entrance-hall and kitchen, fitted
with some pretentious articles of furniture purchased
by many abstinences.</p>

<p>In short, at this time every official betakes himself
to some form of recreation&mdash;playing whist,
drinking tea, and eating cheap pastry or smoking
tobacco in long pipes. Some relate scandals
about great people, for in whatever situation of
life the Russian may be, he always likes to hear
about the aristocracy; others recount well-worn
but popular anecdotes, as for example that of the
commandant to whom it was reported that a
rogue had cut off the horse's tail on the monument
of Peter the Great.</p>

<p>But even at this time of rest and recreation,
Akaki Akakievitch remained faithful to his habits.
No one could say that he had ever seen him in
any evening social circle. After he had written

as much as he wanted, he went to bed, and
thought of the joys of the coming day, and the
fine copies which God would give him to do.</p>

<p>So flowed on the peaceful existence of a man
who was quite content with his post and his income
of four hundred roubles a year. He might
perhaps have reached an extreme old age if one
of those unfortunate events had not befallen him,
which not only happen to titular but to actual
privy, court, and other councillors, and also to
persons who never give advice nor receive it.</p>

<p>In St Petersburg all those who draw a salary
of four hundred roubles or thereabouts have a
terrible enemy in our northern cold, although
some assert that it is very good for the health.
About nine o'clock in the morning, when the
clerks of the various departments betake themselves
to their offices, the cold nips their noses
so vigorously that most of them are quite bewildered.
If at this time even high officials so
suffer from the severity of the cold in their own
persons that the tears come into their eyes, what
must be the sufferings of the titular councillors,
whose means do not allow of their protecting
themselves against the rigour of winter? When
they have put on their light cloaks, they must
hurry through five or six streets as rapidly as
possible, and then in the porter's lodge warm
themselves and wait till their frozen official
faculties have thawed.</p>

<p>For some time Akaki had been feeling on his
back and shoulders very sharp twinges of pain,
although he ran as fast as possible from his
dwelling to the office. After well considering the
matter, he came to the conclusion that these
were due to the imperfections of his cloak. In his
room he examined it carefully, and discovered
that in two or three places it had become so thin
as to be quite transparent, and that the lining
was much torn.</p>

<p>This cloak had been for a long time the standing
object of jests on the part of Akaki's merciless
colleagues. They had even robbed it of the
noble name of &ldquo;cloak,&rdquo; and called it a cowl.
It certainly presented a remarkable appearance.
Every year the collar had grown smaller, for
every year the poor titular councillor had taken
a piece of it away in order to repair some other
part of the cloak; and these repairs did not look
as if they had been done by the skilled hand
of a tailor. They had been executed in a very
clumsy way and looked remarkably ugly.</p>

<p>After Akaki Akakievitch had ended his
melancholy examination, he said to himself that
he must certainly take his cloak to Petrovitch the
tailor, who lived high up in a dark den on the
fourth floor.</p>

<p>With his squinting eyes and pock-marked face,
Petrovitch certainly did not look as if he had the
honour to make frock-coats and trousers for

high officials&mdash;that is to say, when he was sober,
and not absorbed in more pleasant diversions.</p>

<p>I might dispense here with dwelling on this
tailor; but since it is the custom to portray the
physiognomy of every separate personage in a
tale, I must give a better or worse description
of Petrovitch. Formerly when he was a simple
serf in his master's house, he was merely called
Gregor. When he became free, he thought he
ought to adorn himself with a new name, and
dubbed himself Petrovitch; at the same time he
began to drink lustily, not only on the high festivals
but on all those which are marked with a
cross in the calendar. By thus solemnly celebrating
the days consecrated by the Church, he
considered that he was remaining faithful to the
traditions of his childhood; and when he quarrelled
with his wife, he shouted that she was an
earthly minded creature and a German. Of this
lady we have nothing more to relate than that she
was the wife of Petrovitch, and that she did not
wear a kerchief but a cap on her head. For the
rest, she was not pretty; only the soldiers looked
at her as they passed, then they twirled their
moustaches and walked on, laughing.</p>

<p>Akaki Akakievitch accordingly betook himself
to the tailor's attic. He reached it by a dark,
dirty, damp staircase, from which, as in all the
inhabited houses of the poorer class in St Petersburg,
exhaled an effluvia of spirits vexatious to

nose and eyes alike. As the titular councillor
climbed these slippery stairs, he calculated what
sum Petrovitch could reasonably ask for repairing
his cloak, and determined only to give him
a rouble.</p>

<p>The door of the tailor's flat stood open in order
to provide an outlet for the clouds of smoke which
rolled from the kitchen, where Petrovitch's wife
was just then cooking fish. Akaki, his eyes
smarting, passed through the kitchen without her
seeing him, and entered the room where the
tailor sat on a large, roughly made, wooden table,
his legs crossed like those of a Turkish pasha,
and, as is the custom of tailors, with bare feet.
What first arrested attention, when one approached
him, was his thumb nail, which was a
little misshapen but as hard and strong as the
shell of a tortoise. Round his neck were hung
several skeins of thread, and on his knees lay a
tattered coat. For some minutes he had been
trying in vain to thread his needle. He was first
of all angry with the gathering darkness, then
with the thread.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Why the deuce won't you go in, you
worthless scoundrel!&rdquo; he exclaimed.</p>

<p>Akaki saw at once that he had come at an
inopportune moment. He wished he had found
Petrovitch at a more favourable time, when he
was enjoying himself&mdash;when, as his wife expressed
it, he was having a substantial ration of

brandy. At such times the tailor was extraordinarily
ready to meet his customer's proposals
with bows and gratitude to boot. Sometimes
indeed his wife interfered in the transaction, and
declared that he was drunk and promised to do
the work at much too low a price; but if the
customer paid a trifle more, the matter was
settled.</p>

<p>Unfortunately for the titular councillor,
Petrovitch had just now not yet touched the
brandy flask. At such moments he was hard,
obstinate, and ready to demand an exorbitant
price.</p>

<p>Akaki foresaw this danger, and would gladly
have turned back again, but it was already too
late. The tailor's single eye&mdash;for he was one-eyed&mdash;had
already noticed him, and Akaki
Akakievitch murmured involuntarily &ldquo;Good
day, Petrovitch.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Welcome, sir,&rdquo; answered the tailor, and
fastened his glance on the titular councillor's
hand to see what he had in it.</p>

<p>&ldquo;I come just&mdash;merely&mdash;in order&mdash;I want&mdash;&rdquo;</p>

<p>We must here remark that the modest titular
councillor was in the habit of expressing his
thoughts only by prepositions, adverbs, or particles,
which never yielded a distinct meaning.
If the matter of which he spoke was a difficult
one, he could never finish the sentence he had
begun. So that when transacting business, he

generally entangled himself in the formula &ldquo;Yes&mdash;it
is indeed true that<span style="white-space: nowrap;">&mdash;&mdash;</span>&rdquo; Then he would
remain standing and forget what he wished to
say, or believe that he had said it.</p>

<p>&ldquo;What do you want, sir?&rdquo; asked Petrovitch,
scrutinising him from top to toe with a searching
look, and contemplating his collar, sleeves, coat,
buttons&mdash;in short his whole uniform, although
he knew them all very well, having made them
himself. That is the way of tailors whenever
they meet an acquaintance.</p>

<p>Then Akaki answered, stammering as usual,
&ldquo;I want&mdash;Petrovitch&mdash;this cloak&mdash;you see&mdash;it is
still quite good, only a little dusty&mdash;and therefore
it looks a little old. It is, however, still quite
new, only that it is worn a little&mdash;there in the
back and here in the shoulder&mdash;and there are
three quite little splits. You see it is hardly
worth talking about; it can be thoroughly repaired
in a few minutes.&rdquo;</p>

<p>Petrovitch took the unfortunate cloak, spread
it on the table, contemplated it in silence, and
shook his head. Then he stretched his hand
towards the window-sill for his snuff-box, a round
one with the portrait of a general on the lid. I
do not know whose portrait it was, for it had been
accidentally injured, and the ingenious tailor had
gummed a piece of paper over it.</p>

<p>After Petrovitch had taken a pinch of snuff, he
examined the cloak again, held it to the light, and

once more shook his head. Then he examined
the lining, took a second pinch of snuff, and at
last exclaimed, &ldquo;No! that is a wretched rag!
It is beyond repair!&rdquo;</p>

<p>At these words Akaki's courage fell.</p>

<p>&ldquo;What!&rdquo; he cried in the querulous tone of a
child. &ldquo;Can this hole really not be repaired?
Look! Petrovitch; there are only two rents, and
you have enough pieces of cloth to mend them
with.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Yes, I have enough pieces of cloth; but how
should I sew them on? The stuff is quite worn
out; it won't bear another stitch.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Well, can't you strengthen it with another
piece of cloth?&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;No, it won't bear anything more; cloth after
all is only cloth, and in its present condition a
gust of wind might blow the wretched mantle into
tatters.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;But if you could only make it last a little
longer, do you see&mdash;really<span style="white-space: nowrap;">&mdash;&mdash;</span>&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;No!&rdquo; answered Petrovitch decidedly.
&ldquo;There is nothing more to be done with it; it is
completely worn out. It would be better if you
made yourself foot bandages out of it for the
winter; they are warmer than stockings. It was
the Germans who invented stockings for their
own profit.&rdquo; Petrovitch never lost an opportunity
of having a hit at the Germans. &ldquo;You
must certainly buy a new cloak,&rdquo; he added.</p>

<p>&ldquo;A new cloak?&rdquo; exclaimed Akaki Akakievitch,
and it grew dark before his eyes. The
tailor's work-room seemed to go round with him,
and the only object he could clearly distinguish
was the paper-patched general's portrait on the
tailor's snuff-box. &ldquo;A new cloak!&rdquo; he murmured,
as though half asleep. &ldquo;But I have no
money.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Yes, a new cloak,&rdquo; repeated Petrovitch with
cruel calmness.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Well, even if I did decide on it&mdash;how
much<span style="white-space: nowrap;">&mdash;&mdash;</span>&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;You mean how much would it cost?&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Yes.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;About a hundred and fifty roubles,&rdquo;
answered the tailor, pursing his lips. This
diabolical tailor took a special pleasure in
embarrassing his customers and watching the
expression of their faces with his squinting
single eye.</p>

<p>&ldquo;A hundred and fifty roubles for a cloak!&rdquo;
exclaimed Akaki Akakievitch in a tone which
sounded like an outcry&mdash;possibly the first he had
uttered since his birth.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Yes,&rdquo; replied Petrovitch. &ldquo;And then the
marten-fur collar and silk lining for the hood
would make it up to two hundred roubles.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Petrovitch, I adjure you!&rdquo; said Akaki
Akakievitch in an imploring tone, no longer
hearing nor wishing to hear the tailor's words,

&ldquo;try to make this cloak last me a little
longer.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;No, it would be a useless waste of time and
work.&rdquo;</p>

<p>After this answer, Akaki departed, feeling
quite crushed; while Petrovitch, with his lips
firmly pursed up, feeling pleased with himself for
his firmness and brave defence of the art of
tailoring, remained sitting on the table.</p>

<p>Meanwhile Akaki wandered about the streets
like a somnambulist, at random and without an
object. &ldquo;What a terrible business!&rdquo; he said
to himself. &ldquo;Really, I could never have believed
that it would come to that. No,&rdquo; he
continued after a short pause, &ldquo;I could not
have guessed that it would come to that. Now
I find myself in a completely unexpected situation&mdash;in
a difficulty that<span style="white-space: nowrap;">&mdash;&mdash;</span>&rdquo;</p>

<p>As he thus continued his monologue, instead
of approaching his dwelling, he went, without
noticing it, in quite a wrong direction. A
chimney-sweep brushed against him and blackened
his back as he passed by. From a house
where building was going on, a bucket of plaster
of Paris was emptied on his head. But he saw
and heard nothing. Only when he collided with
a sentry, who, after he had planted his halberd
beside him, was shaking out some snuff from his
snuff-box with a bony hand, was he startled out
of his reverie.</p>

<p>&ldquo;What do you want?&rdquo; the rough guardian
of civic order exclaimed. &ldquo;Can't you walk on
the pavement properly?&rdquo;</p>

<p>This sudden address at last completely roused
Akaki from his torpid condition. He collected
his thoughts, considered his situation clearly, and
began to take counsel with himself seriously and
frankly, as with a friend to whom one entrusts
the most intimate secrets.</p>

<p>&ldquo;No!&rdquo; he said at last. &ldquo;To-day I will get
nothing from Petrovitch&mdash;to-day he is in a bad
humour&mdash;perhaps his wife has beaten him&mdash;I
will look him up again next Sunday. On Saturday
evenings he gets intoxicated; then the next
day he wants a pick-me-up&mdash;his wife gives him
no money&mdash;I squeeze a ten-kopeck piece into
his hand; then he will be more reasonable and
we can discuss the cloak further.&rdquo;</p>

<p>Encouraged by these reflections, Akaki waited
patiently till Sunday. On that day, having seen
Petrovitch's wife leave the house, he betook
himself to the tailor's and found him, as he had
expected, in a very depressed state as the result
of his Saturday's dissipation. But hardly had
Akaki let a word fall about the mantle than the
diabolical tailor awoke from his torpor and
exclaimed, &ldquo;No, nothing can be done; you must
certainly buy a new cloak.&rdquo;</p>

<p>The titular councillor pressed a ten-kopeck
piece into his hand.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Thanks, my dear friend,&rdquo; said Petrovitch;
&ldquo;that will get me a pick-me-up, and I will
drink your health with it. But as for your old
mantle, what is the use of talking about it? It
isn't worth a farthing. Let me only get to
work; I will make you a splendid one, I
promise!&rdquo;</p>

<p>But poor Akaki Akakievitch still importuned
the tailor to repair his old one.</p>

<p>&ldquo;No, and again no,&rdquo; answered Petrovitch.
&ldquo;It is quite impossible. Trust me; I won't take
you in. I will even put silver hooks and eyes
on the collar, as is now the fashion.&rdquo;</p>

<p>This time Akaki saw that he must follow the
tailor's advice, and again all his courage sank.
He must have a new mantle made. But how
should he pay for it? He certainly expected a
Christmas bonus at the office; but that money had
been allotted beforehand. He must buy a pair
of trousers, and pay his shoemaker for repairing
two pairs of boots, and buy some fresh linen.
Even if, by an unexpected stroke of good luck,
the director raised the usual bonus from forty to
fifty roubles, what was such a small amount in
comparison with the immense sum which Petrovitch
demanded? A mere drop of water in the
sea.</p>

<p>At any rate, he might expect that Petrovitch,
if he were in a good humour, would lower the
price of the cloak to eighty roubles; but where

were these eighty roubles to be found? Perhaps
he might succeed if he left no stone unturned,
in raising half the sum; but he saw no means of
procuring the other half. As regards the first
half, he had been in the habit, as often as he
received a rouble, of placing a kopeck in a
money-box. At the end of each half-year he
changed these copper coins for silver. He had
been doing this for some time, and his savings
just now amounted to forty roubles. Thus he
already had half the required sum. But the
other half!</p>

<p>Akaki made long calculations, and at last
determined that he must, at least for a whole
year, reduce some of his daily expenses. He
would have to give up his tea in the evening, and
copy his documents in his landlady's room, in
order to economise the fuel in his own. He also
resolved to avoid rough pavements as much as
possible, in order to spare his shoes; and finally
to give out less washing to the laundress.</p>

<p>At first he found these deprivations rather
trying; but gradually he got accustomed to them,
and at last took to going to bed without any
supper at all. Although his body suffered from
this abstinence, his spirit derived all the richer
nutriment from perpetually thinking about his
new cloak. From that time it seemed as though
his nature had completed itself; as though he had
married and possessed a companion on his life

journey. This companion was the thought of his
new cloak, properly wadded and lined.</p>

<p>From that time he became more lively, and
his character grew stronger, like that of a man
who has set a goal before himself which he will
reach at all costs. All that was indecisive and
vague in his gait and gestures had disappeared.
A new fire began to gleam in his eyes, and in
his bold dreams he sometimes even proposed to
himself the question whether he should not have
a marten-fur collar made for his coat.</p>

<p>These and similar thoughts sometimes caused
him to be absent-minded. As he was copying
his documents one day he suddenly noticed that
he had made a slip. &ldquo;Ugh!&rdquo; he exclaimed,
and crossed himself.</p>

<p>At least once a month he went to Petrovitch to
discuss the precious cloak with him, and to settle
many important questions, e.g. where and at
what price he should buy the cloth, and what
colour he should choose.</p>

<p>Each of these visits gave rise to new discussions,
but he always returned home in a happier
mood, feeling that at last the day must come
when all the materials would have been bought
and the cloak would be lying ready to put on.</p>

<p>This great event happened sooner than he had
hoped. The director gave him a bonus, not of
forty or fifty, but of five-and-sixty roubles. Had
the worthy official noticed that Akaki needed a

new mantle, or was the exceptional amount of
the gift only due to chance?</p>

<p>However that might be, Akaki was now richer
by twenty roubles. Such an access of wealth
necessarily hastened his important undertaking.
After two or three more months of enduring
hunger, he had collected his eighty roubles.
His heart, generally so quiet, began to beat
violently; he hastened to Petrovitch, who accompanied
him to a draper's shop. There, without
hesitating, they bought a very fine piece of cloth.
For more than half a year they had discussed the
matter incessantly, and gone round the shops
inquiring prices. Petrovitch examined the cloth,
and said they would not find anything better.
For the lining they chose a piece of such firm and
thickly woven linen that the tailor declared it was
better than silk; it also had a splendid gloss on
it. They did not buy marten fur, for it was too
dear, but chose the best catskin in the shop,
which was a very good imitation of the former.</p>

<p>It took Petrovitch quite fourteen days to make
the mantle, for he put an extra number of
stitches into it. He charged twelve roubles for
his work, and said he could not ask less; it was
all sewn with silk, and the tailor smoothed the
sutures with his teeth.</p>

<p>At last the day came&mdash;I cannot name it
certainly, but it assuredly was the most solemn
in Akaki's life&mdash;when the tailor brought the

cloak. He brought it early in the morning,
before the titular councillor started for his office.
He could not have come at a more suitable
moment, for the cold had again begun to be
very severe.</p>

<p>Petrovitch entered the room with the dignified
mien of an important tailor. His face wore
a peculiarly serious expression, such as Akaki
had never seen on it. He was fully conscious
of his dignity, and of the gulf which separates
the tailor who only repairs old clothes from the
artist who makes new ones.</p>

<p>The cloak had been brought wrapped up in a
large, new, freshly washed handkerchief, which
the tailor carefully opened, folded, and placed
in his pocket. Then he proudly took the cloak
in both hands and laid it on Akaki Akakievitch's
shoulders. He pulled it straight behind to see
how it hung majestically in its whole length.
Finally he wished to see the effect it made when
unbuttoned. Akaki, however, wished to try
the sleeves, which fitted wonderfully well. In
brief, the cloak was irreproachable, and its fit
and cut left nothing to be desired.</p>

<p>While the tailor was contemplating his work,
he did not forget to say that the only reason he
had charged so little for making it, was that he
had only a low rent to pay and had known Akaki
Akakievitch for a long time; he declared that
any tailor who lived on the Nevski Prospect

would have charged at least five-and-sixty
roubles for making up such a cloak.</p>

<p>The titular councillor did not let himself be
involved in a discussion on the subject. He
thanked him, paid him, and then sallied forth on
his way to the office.</p>

<p>Petrovitch went out with him, and remained
standing in the street to watch Akaki as long as
possible wearing the mantle; then he hurried
through a cross-alley and came into the main
street again to catch another glimpse of him.</p>

<p>Akaki went on his way in high spirits. Every
moment he was acutely conscious of having
a new cloak on, and smiled with sheer self-complacency.
His head was filled with only
two ideas: first that the cloak was warm, and
secondly that it was beautiful. Without noticing
anything on the road, he marched straight to
the chancellery, took off his treasure in the hall,
and solemnly entrusted it to the porter's care.</p>

<p>I do not know how the report spread in the
office that Akaki's old cloak had ceased to exist.
All his colleagues hastened to see his splendid
new one, and then began to congratulate him
so warmly that he at first had to smile with
self-satisfaction, but finally began to feel embarrassed.</p>

<p>But how great was his surprise when his cruel
colleagues remarked that he should formally
&ldquo;handsel&rdquo; his cloak by giving them a feast!

Poor Akaki was so disconcerted and taken aback,
that he did not know what to answer nor how to
excuse himself. He stammered out, blushing,
that the cloak was not so new as it appeared; it
was really second-hand.</p>

<p>One of his superiors, who probably wished to
show that he was not too proud of his rank and
title, and did not disdain social intercourse with
his subordinates, broke in and said, &ldquo;Gentlemen!
Instead of Akaki Akakievitch, I will invite
you to a little meal. Come to tea with
me this evening. To-day happens to be my
birthday.&rdquo;</p>

<p>All the others thanked him for his kind
proposal, and joyfully accepted his invitation.
Akaki at first wished to decline, but was told
that to do so would be grossly impolite and
unpardonable, so he reconciled himself to the
inevitable. Moreover, he felt a certain satisfaction
at the thought that the occasion would give
him a new opportunity of displaying his cloak in
the streets. This whole day for him was like a
festival day. In the cheerfullest possible mood
he returned home, took off his cloak, and hung
it up on the wall after once more examining the
cloth and the lining. Then he took out his old
one in order to compare it with Petrovitch's
masterpiece. His looks passed from one to
the other, and he thought to himself, smiling,
&ldquo;What a difference!&rdquo;</p>

<p>He ate his supper cheerfully, and after he
had finished, did not sit down as usual to copy
documents. No; he lay down, like a Sybarite,
on the sofa and waited. When the time came,
he made his toilette, took his cloak, and went
out.</p>

<p>I cannot say where was the house of the
superior official who so graciously invited his
subordinates to tea. My memory begins to grow
weak, and the innumerable streets and houses
of St Petersburg go round so confusedly in my
head that I have difficulty in finding my way
about them. So much, however, is certain:
that the honourable official lived in a very fine
quarter of the city, and therefore very far from
Akaki Akakievitch's dwelling.</p>

<p>At first the titular councillor traversed several
badly lit streets which seemed quite empty; but
the nearer he approached his superior's house,
the more brilliant and lively the streets became.
He met many people, among whom were
elegantly dressed ladies, and men with beaverskin
collars. The peasants' sledges, with their
wooden seats and brass studs, became rarer;
while now every moment appeared skilled coachmen
with velvet caps, driving lacquered sleighs
covered with bearskins, and fine carriages.</p>

<p>At last he reached the house whither he had
been invited. His host lived in a first-rate style;
a lamp hung before his door, and he occupied

the whole of the second story. As Akaki
entered the vestibule, he saw a long row of
galoshes; on a table a samovar was smoking and
hissing; many cloaks, some of them adorned
with velvet and fur collars, hung on the wall.
In the adjoining room he heard a confused noise,
which assumed a more decided character when
a servant opened the door and came out bearing
a tray full of empty cups, a milk-jug, and a
basket of biscuits. Evidently the guests had
been there some time and had already drunk
their first cup of tea.</p>

<p>After hanging his cloak on a peg, Akaki
approached the room in which his colleagues,
smoking long pipes, were sitting round the card-table
and making a good deal of noise. He
entered the room, but remained standing by the
door, not knowing what to do; but his colleagues
greeted him with loud applause, and all hastened
into the vestibule to take another look at his
cloak. This excitement quite robbed the good
titular councillor of his composure; but in his
simplicity of heart he rejoiced at the praises
which were lavished on his precious cloak.
Soon afterwards his colleagues left him to himself
and resumed their whist parties.</p>

<p>Akaki felt much embarrassed, and did not
know what to do with his feet and hands.
Finally he sat down by the players; looked now
at their faces and now at the cards; then he

yawned and remembered that it was long past
his usual bedtime. He made an attempt to go,
but they held him back and told him that he
could not do so without drinking a glass of
champagne on what was for him such a memorable
day.</p>

<p>Soon supper was brought. It consisted of
cold veal, cakes, and pastry of various kinds,
accompanied by several bottles of champagne.
Akaki was obliged to drink two glasses of it, and
found everything round him take on a more
cheerful aspect. But he could not forget that it
was already midnight and that he ought to have
been in bed long ago. From fear of being kept
back again, he slipped furtively into the vestibule,
where he was pained to find his cloak lying
on the ground. He carefully shook it, brushed
it, put it on, and went out.</p>

<p>The street-lamps were still alight. Some of
the small ale-houses frequented by servants and
the lower classes were still open, and some had
just been shut; but by the beams of light which
shone through the chinks of the doors, it was
easy to see that there were still people inside,
probably male and female domestics, who were
quite indifferent to their employers' interests.</p>

<p>Akaki Akakievitch turned homewards in a
cheerful mood. Suddenly he found himself in
a long street where it was very quiet by day and
still more so at night. The surroundings were

very dismal. Only here and there hung a lamp
which threatened to go out for want of oil; there
were long rows of wooden houses with wooden
fences, but no sign of a living soul. Only the
snow in the street glimmered faintly in the dim
light of the half-extinguished lanterns, and the
little houses looked melancholy in the darkness.</p>

<p>Akaki went on till the street opened into an
enormous square, on the other side of which the
houses were scarcely visible, and which looked
like a terrible desert. At a great distance&mdash;God
knows where!&mdash;glimmered the light in a sentry-box,
which seemed to stand at the end of the
world. At the same moment Akaki's cheerful
mood vanished. He went in the direction of the
light with a vague sense of depression, as though
some mischief threatened him. On the way he
kept looking round him with alarm. The huge,
melancholy expanse looked to him like a sea.
&ldquo;No,&rdquo; he thought to himself, &ldquo;I had better not
look at it&rdquo;; and he continued his way with his
eyes fixed on the ground. When he raised them
again he suddenly saw just in front of him several
men with long moustaches, whose faces he could
not distinguish. Everything grew dark before
his eyes, and his heart seemed to be constricted.</p>

<p>&ldquo;That is my cloak!&rdquo; shouted one of the men,
and seized him by the collar. Akaki tried to
call for help. Another man pressed a great
bony fist on his mouth, and said to him, &ldquo;Just

try to scream again!&rdquo; At the same moment
the unhappy titular councillor felt the cloak
snatched away from him, and simultaneously
received a kick which stretched him senseless
in the snow. A few minutes later he came to
himself and stood up; but there was no longer
anyone in sight. Robbed of his cloak, and feeling
frozen to the marrow, he began to shout with
all his might; but his voice did not reach the end
of the huge square. Continuing to shout, he
ran with the rage of despair to the sentinel in the
sentry-box, who, leaning on his halberd, asked
him why the deuce he was making such a hellish
noise and running so violently.</p>

<p>When Akaki reached the sentinel, he accused
him of being drunk because he did not see that
passers-by were robbed a short distance from his
sentry-box.</p>

<p>&ldquo;I saw you quite well,&rdquo; answered the sentinel,
&ldquo;in the middle of the square with two
men; I thought you were friends. It is no good
getting so excited. Go to-morrow to the police
inspector; he will take up the matter, have the
thieves searched for, and make an examination.&rdquo;</p>

<p>Akaki saw there was nothing to be done but
to go home. He reached his dwelling in a state
of dreadful disorder, his hair hanging wildly
over his forehead, and his clothes covered
with snow. When his old landlady heard him

knocking violently at the door, she sprang up
and hastened thither, only half-dressed; but at
the sight of Akaki started back in alarm. When
he told her what had happened, she clasped her
hands together and said, &ldquo;You should not go to
the police inspector, but to the municipal Superintendent
of the district. The inspector will put
you off with fine words, and do nothing; but I
have known the Superintendent for a long time.
My former cook, Anna, is now in his service,
and I often see him pass by under our windows.
He goes to church on all the festival-days, and
one sees at once by his looks that he is an honest
man.&rdquo;</p>

<p>After hearing this eloquent recommendation,
Akaki retired sadly to his room. Those who can
picture to themselves such a situation will understand
what sort of a night he passed. As early
as possible the next morning he went to the
Superintendent's house. The servants told him
that he was still asleep. At ten o'clock he
returned, only to receive the same reply. At
twelve o'clock the Superintendent had gone out.</p>

<p>About dinner-time the titular councillor called
again, but the clerks asked him in a severe tone
what was his business with their superior. Then
for the first time in his life Akaki displayed an
energetic character. He declared that it was
absolutely necessary for him to speak with the
Superintendent on an official matter, and that

anyone who ventured to put difficulties in his
way would have to pay dearly for it.</p>

<p>This left them without reply. One of the
clerks departed, in order to deliver his message.
When Akaki was admitted to the Superintendent's
presence, the latter's way of receiving his
story was somewhat singular. Instead of confining
himself to the principal matter&mdash;the theft,
he asked the titular councillor how he came to
be out so late, and whether he had not been in
suspicious company.</p>

<p>Taken aback by such a question, Akaki did
not know what to answer, and went away without
knowing whether any steps would be taken
in the matter or not.</p>

<p>The whole day he had not been in his office&mdash;a
perfectly new event in his life. The next day
he appeared there again with a pale face and
restless aspect, in his old cloak, which looked
more wretched than ever. When his colleagues
heard of his misfortune, some were cruel enough
to laugh; most of them, however, felt a sincere
sympathy with him, and started a subscription
for his benefit; but this praiseworthy undertaking
had only a very insignificant result, because
these same officials had been lately called upon
to contribute to two other subscriptions&mdash;in the
first case to purchase a portrait of their director,
and in the second to buy a work which a friend
of his had published.</p>

<p>One of them, who felt sincerely sorry for
Akaki, gave him some good advice for want of
something better. He told him it was a waste
of time to go again to the Superintendent,
because even in case that this official succeeded
in recovering the cloak, the police would keep it
till the titular councillor had indisputably proved
that he was the real owner of it. Akaki's friend
suggested to him to go to a certain important
personage, who because of his connection with
the authorities could expedite the matter.</p>

<p>In his bewilderment, Akaki resolved to follow
this advice. It was not known what position
this personage occupied, nor how high it really
was; the only facts known were that he had
only recently been placed in it, and that there
must be still higher personages than himself, as
he was leaving no stone unturned in order to get
promotion. When he entered his private room,
he made his subordinates wait for him on the
stairs below, and no one had direct access to
him. If anyone called with a request to see him,
the secretary of the board informed the Government
secretary, who in his turn passed it on to
a higher official, and the latter informed the
important personage himself.</p>

<p>That is the way business is carried on in our
Holy Russia. In the endeavour to resemble the
higher officials, everyone imitates the manners
of his superiors. Not long ago a titular councillor,

who was appointed to the headship of a
little office, immediately placed over the door
of one of his two tiny rooms the inscription
&ldquo;Council-chamber.&rdquo; Outside it were placed
servants with red collars and lace-work on their
coats, in order to announce petitioners, and to
conduct them into the chamber which was hardly
large enough to contain a chair.</p>

<p>But let us return to the important personage
in question. His way of carrying things on was
dignified and imposing, but a trifle complicated.
His system might be summed up in a single
word&mdash;&ldquo;severity.&rdquo; This word he would repeat
in a sonorous tone three times in succession, and
the last time turn a piercing look on the person
with whom he happened to be speaking. He
might have spared himself the trouble of displaying
so much disciplinary energy; the ten
officials who were under his command feared
him quite sufficiently without it. As soon as
they were aware of his approach, they would lay
down their pens, and hasten to station themselves
in a respectful attitude as he passed by.
In converse with his subordinates, he preserved
a stiff, unbending attitude, and generally confined
himself to such expressions as &ldquo;What do
you want? Do you know with whom you are
speaking? Do you consider who is in front of
you?&rdquo;</p>

<p>For the rest, he was a good-natured man,

friendly and amiable with his acquaintances.
But the title of &ldquo;District-Superintendent&rdquo; had
turned his head. Since the time when it had
been bestowed upon him, he lived for a great
part of the day in a kind of dizzy self-intoxication.
Among his equals, however, he recovered
his equilibrium, and then showed his real
amiability in more than one direction; but as
soon as he found himself in the society of anyone
of less rank than himself, he entrenched himself
in a severe taciturnity. This situation was all
the more painful for him as he was quite aware
that he might have passed his time more agreeably.</p>

<p>All who watched him at such moments perceived
clearly that he longed to take part in an
interesting conversation, but that the fear of
displaying some unguarded courtesy, of appearing
too confidential, and thereby doing a deadly
injury to his dignity, held him back. In order
to avoid such a risk, he maintained an unnatural
reserve, and only spoke from time to time in
monosyllables. He had driven this habit to such
a pitch that people called him &ldquo;The Tedious,&rdquo;
and the title was well deserved.</p>

<p>Such was the person to whose aid Akaki
wished to appeal. The moment at which he
came seemed expressly calculated to flatter the
Superintendent's vanity, and accordingly to help
forward the titular councillor's cause.</p>

<p>The high personage was seated in his office,
talking cheerfully with an old friend whom he
had not seen for several years, when he was told
that a gentleman named Akakievitch begged for
the honour of an interview.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Who is the man?&rdquo; asked the Superintendent
in a contemptuous tone.</p>

<p>&ldquo;An official,&rdquo; answered the servant.</p>

<p>&ldquo;He must wait. I have no time to receive
him now.&rdquo;</p>

<p>The high personage lied; there was nothing
in the way of his granting the desired audience.
His friend and himself had already quite exhausted
various topics of conversation. Many
long, embarrassing pauses had occurred, during
which they had lightly tapped each other on the
shoulder, saying, &ldquo;So it was, you see.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Yes, Stepan.&rdquo;</p>

<p>But the Superintendent refused to receive the
petitioner, in order to show his friend, who had
quitted the public service and lived in the
country, his own importance, and how officials
must wait in the vestibule till he chose to receive
them.</p>

<p>At last, after they had discussed various other
subjects with other intervals of silence, during
which the two friends leaned back in their chairs
and blew cigarette smoke in the air, the Superintendent
seemed suddenly to remember that
someone had sought an interview with him. He

called the secretary, who stood with a roll of
papers in his hand at the door, and told him to
admit the petitioner.</p>

<p>When he saw Akaki approaching with his
humble expression, wearing his shabby old
uniform, he turned round suddenly towards him
and said &ldquo;What do you want?&rdquo; in a severe
voice, accompanied by a vibrating intonation
which at the time of receiving his promotion he
had practised before the looking-glass for eight
days.</p>

<p>The modest Akaki was quite taken aback by
his harsh manner; however, he made an effort
to recover his composure, and to relate how his
cloak had been stolen, but did not do so without
encumbering his narrative with a mass of superfluous
detail. He added that he had applied to
His Excellence in the hope that through his
making a representation to the police inspector,
or some other high personage, the cloak might
be traced.</p>

<p>The Superintendent found Akaki's method of
procedure somewhat unofficial. &ldquo;Ah, sir,&rdquo; he
said, &ldquo;don't you know what steps you ought to
take in such a case? Don't you know the proper
procedure? You should have handed in your
petition at the chancellery. This in due course
would have passed through the hands of the chief
clerk and director of the bureau. It would
then have been brought before my secretary,

who would have made a communication to
you.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Allow me,&rdquo; replied Akaki, making a strenuous
effort to preserve the remnants of his
presence of mind, for he felt that the perspiration
stood on his forehead, &ldquo;allow me to remark
to Your Excellence that I ventured to trouble
you personally in this matter because secretaries&mdash;secretaries
are a hopeless kind of people.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;What! How! Is it possible?&rdquo; exclaimed
the Superintendent. &ldquo;How could you say such
a thing? Where have you got your ideas from?
It is disgraceful to see young people so rebellious
towards their superiors.&rdquo; In his official zeal
the Superintendent overlooked the fact that the
titular councillor was well on in the fifties, and
that the word &ldquo;young&rdquo; could only apply to him
conditionally, i.e. in comparison with a man of
seventy. &ldquo;Do you also know,&rdquo; he continued,
&ldquo;with whom you are speaking? Do you consider
before whom you are standing? Do you
consider, I ask you, do you consider?&rdquo; As he
spoke, he stamped his foot, and his voice grew
deeper.</p>

<p>Akaki was quite upset&mdash;nay, thoroughly
frightened; he trembled and shook and could
hardly remain standing upright. Unless one of
the office servants had hurried to help him, he
would have fallen to the ground. As it was, he
was dragged out almost unconscious.</p>

<p>But the Superintendent was quite delighted at
the effect he had produced. It exceeded all his
expectations, and filled with satisfaction at the
fact that his words made such an impression on a
middle-aged man that he lost consciousness, he
cast a side-glance at his friend to see what effect
the scene had produced on him. His self-satisfaction
was further increased when he observed
that his friend also was moved, and looked
at him half-timidly.</p>

<p>Akaki had no idea how he got down the stairs
and crossed the street, for he felt more dead than
alive. In his whole life he had never been so
scolded by a superior official, let alone one whom
he had never seen before.</p>

<p>He wandered in the storm which raged without
taking the least care of himself, nor sheltering
himself on the side-walk against its fury. The
wind, which blew from all sides and out of all the
narrow streets, caused him to contract inflammation
of the throat. When he reached home he
was unable to speak a word, and went straight
to bed.</p>

<p>Such was the result of the Superintendent's
lecture.</p>

<p>The next day Akaki had a violent fever.
Thanks to the St Petersburg climate, his illness
developed with terrible rapidity. When the
doctor came, he saw that the case was already
hopeless; he felt his pulse and ordered him some

poultices, merely in order that he should not die
without some medical help, and declared at once
that he had only two days to live. After giving
this opinion, he said to Akaki's landlady, &ldquo;There
is no time to be lost; order a pine coffin, for an
oak one would be too expensive for this poor
man.&rdquo;</p>

<p>Whether the titular councillor heard these
words, whether they excited him and made him
lament his tragic lot, no one ever knew, for he
was delirious all the time. Strange pictures
passed incessantly through his weakened brain.
At one time he saw Petrovitch the tailor and
asked him to make a cloak with nooses attached
for the thieves who persecuted him in bed, and
begged his old landlady to chase away the
robbers who were hidden under his coverlet.
At another time he seemed to be listening to the
Superintendent's severe reprimand, and asking
his forgiveness. Then he uttered such strange
and confused remarks that the old woman
crossed herself in alarm. She had never heard
anything of the kind in her life, and these ravings
astonished her all the more because the expression
&ldquo;Your Excellency&rdquo; constantly occurred
in them. Later on he murmured wild disconnected
words, from which it could only be
gathered that his thoughts were continually
revolving round a cloak.</p>

<p>At last Akaki breathed his last. Neither his

room nor his cupboard were officially sealed up,
for the simple reason that he had no heir and left
nothing behind him but a bundle of goose-quills,
a notebook of white paper, three pairs of socks,
some trouser buttons, and his old coat.</p>

<p>Into whose possession did these relics pass?
Heaven only knows! The writer of this narrative
has never inquired.</p>

<p>Akaki was wrapped in his shroud, and laid
to rest in the churchyard. The great city of
St Petersburg continued its life as though he
had never existed. Thus disappeared a human
creature who had never possessed a patron or
friend, who had never elicited real hearty
sympathy from anyone, nor even aroused the
curiosity of the naturalists, though they are most
eager to subject a rare insect to microscopic
examination.</p>

<p>Without a complaint he had borne the scorn
and contempt of his colleagues; he had proceeded
on his quiet way to the grave without
anything extraordinary happening to him&mdash;only
towards the end of his life he had been joyfully
excited by the possession of a new cloak, and
had then been overthrown by misfortune.</p>

<p>Some days after his conversation with the
Superintendent, his superior in the chancellery,
where no one knew what had become of him,
sent an official to his house to demand his
presence. The official returned with the news

that no one would see the titular councillor any
more.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Why?&rdquo; asked all the clerks.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Because he was buried four days ago.&rdquo;</p>

<p>In such a manner did Akaki's colleagues hear
of his death.</p>

<p>The next day his place was occupied by an
official of robuster fibre, a man who did not
trouble to make so many fair transcripts of state
documents.</p>

<p class="dot-break">. . . . . .</p>

<p>It seems as though Akaki's story ended here,
and that there was nothing more to be said
of him; but the modest titular councillor was
destined to attract more notice after his death
than during his life, and our tale now assumes a
somewhat ghostly complexion.</p>

<p>One day there spread in St Petersburg the
report that near the Katinka Bridge there
appeared every night a spectre in a uniform like
that of the chancellery officials; that he was
searching for a stolen cloak, and stripped all
passers-by of their cloaks without any regard
for rank or title. It mattered not whether they
were lined with wadding, mink, cat, otter, bear,
or beaverskin; he took all he could get hold of.
One of the titular councillor's former colleagues
had seen the ghost, and quite clearly recognised
Akaki. He ran as hard as he could and managed

to escape, but had seen him shaking his fist
in the distance. Everywhere it was reported
that councillors, and not only titular councillors
but also state-councillors, had caught serious
colds in their honourable backs on account of
these raids.</p>

<p>The police adopted all possible measures in
order to get this ghost dead or alive into their
power, and to inflict an exemplary punishment
on him; but all their attempts were vain.</p>

<p>One evening, however, a sentinel succeeded
in getting hold of the malefactor just as he
was trying to rob a musician of his cloak. The
sentinel summoned with all the force of his lungs
two of his comrades, to whom he entrusted the
prisoner while he sought for his snuff-box in
order to bring some life again into his half-frozen
nose. Probably his snuff was so strong that
even a ghost could not stand it. Scarcely had
the sentinel thrust a grain or two up his nostrils
than the prisoner began to sneeze so violently
that a kind of mist rose before the eyes of the
sentinels. While the three were rubbing their
eyes, the prisoner disappeared. Since that day,
all the sentries were so afraid of the ghost that
they did not even venture to arrest the living
but shouted to them from afar &ldquo;Go on! Go
on!&rdquo;</p>

<p>Meanwhile the ghost extended his depredations
to the other side of the Katinka Bridge, and

spread dismay and alarm in the whole of the
quarter.</p>

<p>But now we must return to the Superintendent,
who is the real origin of our fantastic yet
so veracious story. First of all we must do him
the justice to state that after Akaki's departure
he felt a certain sympathy for him. He was by
no means without a sense of justice&mdash;no, he
possessed various good qualities, but his infatuation
about his title hindered him from showing
his good side. When his friend left him, his
thoughts began to occupy themselves with the
unfortunate titular councillor, and from that
moment onwards he saw him constantly in his
mind's eye, crushed by the severe reproof which
had been administered to him. This image so
haunted him that at last one day he ordered one
of his officials to find out what had become of
Akaki, and whether anything could be done for
him.</p>

<p>When the messenger returned with the news
that the poor man had died soon after that
interview, the Superintendent felt a pang in his
conscience, and remained the whole day absorbed
in melancholy brooding.</p>

<p>In order to banish his unpleasant sensations,
he went in the evening to a friend's house, where
he hoped to find pleasant society and what was
the chief thing, some other officials of his own
rank, so that he would not be obliged to feel

bored. And in fact he did succeed in throwing
off his melancholy thoughts there; he unbent
and became lively, took an active part in the
conversation, and passed a very pleasant evening.
At supper he drank two glasses of champagne,
which, as everyone knows, is an effective
means of heightening one's cheerfulness.</p>

<p>As he sat in his sledge, wrapped in his mantle,
on his way home, his mind was full of pleasant
reveries. He thought of the society in which
he had passed such a cheerful evening, and of
all the excellent jokes with which he had made
them laugh. He repeated some of them to
himself half-aloud, and laughed at them again.</p>

<p>From time to time, however, he was disturbed
in this cheerful mood by violent gusts of wind,
which from some corner or other blew a quantity
of snowflakes into his face, lifted the folds of his
cloak, and made it belly like a sail, so that he
had to exert all his strength to hold it firmly on
his shoulders. Suddenly he felt a powerful hand
seize him by the collar. He turned round, perceived
a short man in an old, shabby uniform,
and recognised with terror Akaki's face, which
wore a deathly pallor and emaciation.</p>

<p>The titular councillor opened his mouth, from
which issued a kind of corpse-like odour, and
with inexpressible fright the Superintendent
heard him say, &ldquo;At last I have you&mdash;by the
collar! I need your cloak. You did not

trouble about me when I was in distress; you
thought it necessary to reprimand me. Now
give me your cloak.&rdquo;</p>

<p>The high dignitary nearly choked. In his
office, and especially in the presence of his
subordinates, he was a man of imposing
manners. He only needed to fix his eye on one
of them and they all seemed impressed by his
pompous bearing. But, as is the case with
many such officials, all this was only outward
show; at this moment he felt so upset that he
seriously feared for his health. Taking off his
cloak with a feverish, trembling hand, he handed
it to Akaki, and called to his coachman, &ldquo;Drive
home quickly.&rdquo;</p>

<p>When the coachman heard this voice, which
did not sound as it usually did, and had often
been accompanied by blows of a whip, he bent
his head cautiously and drove on apace.</p>

<p>Soon afterwards the Superintendent found
himself at home. Cloakless, he retired to his
room with a pale face and wild looks, and had
such a bad night that on the following morning
his daughter exclaimed &ldquo;Father, are you ill?&rdquo;
But he said nothing of what he had seen, though
a very deep impression had been made on him.
From that day onwards he no longer addressed
to his subordinates in a violent tone the words,
&ldquo;Do you know with whom you are speaking?
Do you know who is standing before you?&rdquo; Or

if it ever did happen that he spoke to them in a
domineering tone, it was not till he had first
listened to what they had to say.</p>

<p>Strangely enough, from that time the spectre
never appeared again. Probably it was the
Superintendent's cloak which he had been seeking
so earnestly; now he had it and did not
want anything more. Various persons, however,
asserted that this formidable ghost was still to be
seen in other parts of the city. A sentinel went
so far as to say that he had seen him with his own
eyes glide like a furtive shadow behind a house.
But this sentinel was of such a nervous disposition
that he had been chaffed about his timidity
more than once. Since he did not venture to
seize the flitting shadow, he stole after it in the
darkness; but the shadow turned round and
shouted at him &ldquo;What do you want?&rdquo; shaking
an enormous fist, such as no man had ever
possessed.</p>

<p>&ldquo;I want nothing,&rdquo; answered the sentry,
quickly retiring.</p>

<p>This shadow, however, was taller than the
ghost of the titular councillor, and had an enormous
moustache. He went with great strides
towards the Obuchoff Bridge, and disappeared in
the darkness.</p>

<h2>THE NOSE</h2>

<h3>I</h3>

<p class="no-indent"><span class="small-caps">On</span> the 25th March, 18&mdash;, a very strange occurrence
took place in St Petersburg. On the
Ascension Avenue there lived a barber of the
name of Ivan Jakovlevitch. He had lost his
family name, and on his sign-board, on which
was depicted the head of a gentleman with one
cheek soaped, the only inscription to be read
was, &ldquo;Blood-letting done here.&rdquo;</p>

<p>On this particular morning he awoke pretty
early. Becoming aware of the smell of fresh-baked
bread, he sat up a little in bed, and saw
his wife, who had a special partiality for coffee,
in the act of taking some fresh-baked bread out
of the oven.</p>

<p>&ldquo;To-day, Prasskovna Ossipovna,&rdquo; he said,
&ldquo;I do not want any coffee; I should like a fresh
loaf with onions.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;The blockhead may eat bread only as far as
I am concerned,&rdquo; said his wife to herself; &ldquo;then
I shall have a chance of getting some coffee.&rdquo;
And she threw a loaf on the table.</p>

<p>For the sake of propriety, Ivan Jakovlevitch
drew a coat over his shirt, sat down at the table,
shook out some salt for himself, prepared two
onions, assumed a serious expression, and began
to cut the bread. After he had cut the loaf in
two halves, he looked, and to his great astonishment
saw something whitish sticking in it. He
carefully poked round it with his knife, and felt
it with his finger.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Quite firmly fixed!&rdquo; he murmured in his
beard. &ldquo;What can it be?&rdquo;</p>

<p>He put in his finger, and drew out&mdash;a nose!</p>

<p>Ivan Jakovlevitch at first let his hands fall
from sheer astonishment; then he rubbed his
eyes and began to feel it. A nose, an actual
nose; and, moreover, it seemed to be the nose
of an acquaintance! Alarm and terror were
depicted in Ivan's face; but these feelings were
slight in comparison with the disgust which took
possession of his wife.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Whose nose have you cut off, you
monster?&rdquo; she screamed, her face red with
anger. &ldquo;You scoundrel! You tippler! I myself
will report you to the police! Such a
rascal! Many customers have told me that
while you were shaving them, you held them so
tight by the nose that they could hardly sit still.&rdquo;</p>

<p>But Ivan Jakovlevitch was more dead than
alive; he saw at once that this nose could belong
to no other than to Kovaloff, a member of the

Municipal Committee whom he shaved every
Sunday and Wednesday.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Stop, Prasskovna Ossipovna! I will wrap
it in a piece of cloth and place it in the corner.
There it may remain for the present; later on I
will take it away.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;No, not there! Shall I endure an amputated
nose in my room? You understand
nothing except how to strop a razor. You know
nothing of the duties and obligations of a respectable
man. You vagabond! You good-for-nothing!
Am I to undertake all responsibility
for you at the police-office? Ah, you soap-smearer!
You blockhead! Take it away where
you like, but don't let it stay under my
eyes!&rdquo;</p>

<p>Ivan Jakovlevitch stood there flabbergasted.
He thought and thought, and knew not what he
thought.</p>

<p>&ldquo;The devil knows how that happened!&rdquo; he
said at last, scratching his head behind his ear.
&ldquo;Whether I came home drunk last night or not,
I really don't know; but in all probability this
is a quite extraordinary occurrence, for a loaf
is something baked and a nose is something
different. I don't understand the matter at
all.&rdquo; And Ivan Jakovlevitch was silent. The
thought that the police might find him in unlawful
possession of a nose and arrest him, robbed
him of all presence of mind. Already he began

to have visions of a red collar with silver braid
and of a sword&mdash;and he trembled all over.</p>

<p>At last he finished dressing himself, and to the
accompaniment of the emphatic exhortations of
his spouse, he wrapped up the nose in a cloth and
issued into the street.</p>

<p>He intended to lose it somewhere&mdash;either at
somebody's door, or in a public square, or in a
narrow alley; but just then, in order to complete
his bad luck, he was met by an acquaintance,
who showered inquiries upon him. &ldquo;Hullo,
Ivan Jakovlevitch! Whom are you going to
shave so early in the morning?&rdquo; etc., so that
he could find no suitable opportunity to do what
he wanted. Later on he did let the nose drop,
but a sentry bore down upon him with his
halberd, and said, &ldquo;Look out! You have let
something drop!&rdquo; and Ivan Jakovlevitch was
obliged to pick it up and put it in his pocket.</p>

<p>A feeling of despair began to take possession
of him; all the more as the streets became more
thronged and the merchants began to open their
shops. At last he resolved to go to the Isaac
Bridge, where perhaps he might succeed in
throwing it into the Neva.</p>

<p>But my conscience is a little uneasy that I have
not yet given any detailed information about
Ivan Jakovlevitch, an estimable man in many
ways.</p>

<p>Like every honest Russian tradesman, Ivan

Jakovlevitch was a terrible drunkard, and
although he shaved other people's faces every
day, his own was always unshaved. His coat
(he never wore an overcoat) was quite mottled,
i.e. it had been black, but become brownish-yellow;
the collar was quite shiny, and instead
of the three buttons, only the threads by which
they had been fastened were to be seen.</p>

<p>Ivan Jakovlevitch was a great cynic, and when
Kovaloff, the member of the Municipal Committee,
said to him, as was his custom while being
shaved, &ldquo;Your hands always smell, Ivan Jakovlevitch!&rdquo;
the latter answered, &ldquo;What do they
smell of?&rdquo; &ldquo;I don't know, my friend, but
they smell very strong.&rdquo; Ivan Jakovlevitch
after taking a pinch of snuff would then, by way
of reprisals, set to work to soap him on the cheek,
the upper lip, behind the ears, on the chin, and
everywhere.</p>

<p>This worthy man now stood on the Isaac
Bridge. At first he looked round him, then he
leant on the railings of the bridge, as though he
wished to look down and see how many fish were
swimming past, and secretly threw the nose,
wrapped in a little piece of cloth, into the
water. He felt as though a ton weight had been
lifted off him, and laughed cheerfully. Instead,
however, of going to shave any officials, he
turned his steps to a building, the sign-board of
which bore the legend &ldquo;Teas served here,&rdquo; in

order to have a glass of punch, when suddenly
he perceived at the other end of the bridge a
police inspector of imposing exterior, with long
whiskers, three-cornered hat, and sword hanging
at his side. He nearly fainted; but the police
inspector beckoned to him with his hand and
said, &ldquo;Come here, my dear sir.&rdquo;</p>

<p>Ivan Jakovlevitch, knowing how a gentleman
should behave, took his hat off quickly, went
towards the police inspector and said, &ldquo;I hope
you are in the best of health.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Never mind my health. Tell me, my
friend, why you were standing on the bridge.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;By heaven, gracious sir, I was on the way
to my customers, and only looked down to see if
the river was flowing quickly.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;That is a lie! You won't get out of it like
that. Confess the truth.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;I am willing to shave Your Grace two or
even three times a week gratis,&rdquo; answered Ivan
Jakovlevitch.</p>

<p>&ldquo;No, my friend, don't put yourself out!
Three barbers are busy with me already, and
reckon it a high honour that I let them show me
their skill. Now then, out with it! What were
you doing there?&rdquo;</p>

<p>Ivan Jakovlevitch grew pale. But here the
strange episode vanishes in mist, and what
further happened is not known.</p>

<h3>II</h3>

<p>Kovaloff, the member of the Municipal Committee,
awoke fairly early that morning, and
made a droning noise&mdash;&ldquo;Brr! Brr!&rdquo;&mdash;through
his lips, as he always did, though he could not
say why. He stretched himself, and told his
valet to give him a little mirror which was on the
table. He wished to look at the heat-boil which
had appeared on his nose the previous evening;
but to his great astonishment, he saw that instead
of his nose he had a perfectly smooth vacancy in
his face. Thoroughly alarmed, he ordered some
water to be brought, and rubbed his eyes with a
towel. Sure enough, he had no longer a nose!
Then he sprang out of bed, and shook himself
violently! No, no nose any more! He dressed
himself and went at once to the police superintendent.</p>

<p>But before proceeding further, we must certainly
give the reader some information about
Kovaloff, so that he may know what sort of a man
this member of the Municipal Committee really
was. These committee-men, who obtain that
title by means of certificates of learning, must
not be compared with the committee-men appointed
for the Caucasus district, who are of
quite a different kind. The learned committee-man&mdash;but

Russia is such a wonderful country
that when one committee-man is spoken of all
the others from Riga to Kamschatka refer it to
themselves. The same is also true of all other
titled officials. Kovaloff had been a Caucasian
committee-man two years previously, and could
not forget that he had occupied that position;
but in order to enhance his own importance,
he never called himself &ldquo;committee-man&rdquo; but
&ldquo;Major.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Listen, my dear,&rdquo; he used to say when he
met an old woman in the street who sold shirt-fronts;
&ldquo;go to my house in Sadovaia Street and
ask &lsquo;Does Major Kovaloff live here?&rsquo; Any
child can tell you where it is.&rdquo;</p>

<p>Accordingly we will call him for the future
Major Kovaloff. It was his custom to take a daily
walk on the Neffsky Avenue. The collar of his
shirt was always remarkably clean and stiff. He
wore the same style of whiskers as those that are
worn by governors of districts, architects, and
regimental doctors; in short, all those who have
full red cheeks and play a good game of whist.
These whiskers grow straight across the cheek
towards the nose.</p>

<p>Major Kovaloff wore a number of seals, on
some of which were engraved armorial bearings,
and others the names of the days of the week.
He had come to St Petersburg with the view of
obtaining some position corresponding to his

rank, if possible that of vice-governor of a
province; but he was prepared to be content with
that of a bailiff in some department or other.
He was, moreover, not disinclined to marry, but
only such a lady who could bring with her a
dowry of two hundred thousand roubles. Accordingly,
the reader can judge for himself what
his sensations were when he found in his face,
instead of a fairly symmetrical nose, a broad,
flat vacancy.</p>

<p>To increase his misfortune, not a single
droshky was to be seen in the street, and so he
was obliged to proceed on foot. He wrapped
himself up in his cloak, and held his handkerchief
to his face as though his nose bled. &ldquo;But
perhaps it is all only my imagination; it is impossible
that a nose should drop off in such a
silly way,&rdquo; he thought, and stepped into a
confectioner's shop in order to look into the
mirror.</p>

<p>Fortunately no customer was in the shop; only
small shop-boys were cleaning it out, and putting
chairs and tables straight. Others with sleepy
faces were carrying fresh cakes on trays, and
yesterday's newspapers stained with coffee were
still lying about. &ldquo;Thank God no one is
here!&rdquo; he said to himself. &ldquo;Now I can look
at myself leisurely.&rdquo;</p>

<p>He stepped gingerly up to a mirror and looked.</p>

<p>&ldquo;What an infernal face!&rdquo; he exclaimed, and

spat with disgust. &ldquo;If there were only something
there instead of the nose, but there is
absolutely nothing.&rdquo;</p>

<p>He bit his lips with vexation, left the confectioner's,
and resolved, quite contrary to his habit,
neither to look nor smile at anyone on the street.
Suddenly he halted as if rooted to the spot before
a door, where something extraordinary happened.
A carriage drew up at the entrance; the
carriage door was opened, and a gentleman in
uniform came out and hurried up the steps.
How great was Kovaloff's terror and astonishment
when he saw that it was his own nose!</p>

<p>At this extraordinary sight, everything seemed
to turn round with him. He felt as though he
could hardly keep upright on his legs; but,
though trembling all over as though with fever,
he resolved to wait till the nose should return
to the carriage. After about two minutes the
nose actually came out again. It wore a gold-embroidered
uniform with a stiff, high collar,
trousers of chamois leather, and a sword hung
at its side. The hat, adorned with a plume,
showed that it held the rank of a state-councillor.
It was obvious that it was paying &ldquo;duty-calls.&rdquo;
It looked round on both sides, called to the
coachman &ldquo;Drive on,&rdquo; and got into the carriage,
which drove away.</p>

<p>Poor Kovaloff nearly lost his reason. He did
not know what to think of this extraordinary

procedure. And indeed how was it possible
that the nose, which only yesterday he had on
his face, and which could neither walk nor drive,
should wear a uniform. He ran after the carriage,
which fortunately had stopped a short way
off before the Grand Bazar of Moscow. He
hurried towards it and pressed through a crowd
of beggar-women with their faces bound up,
leaving only two openings for the eyes, over
whom he had formerly so often made merry.</p>

<p>There were only a few people in front of the
Bazar. Kovaloff was so agitated that he could
decide on nothing, and looked for the nose
everywhere. At last he saw it standing before
a shop. It seemed half buried in its stiff collar,
and was attentively inspecting the wares displayed.</p>

<p>&ldquo;How can I get at it?&rdquo; thought Kovaloff.
&ldquo;Everything&mdash;the uniform, the hat, and so on&mdash;show
that it is a state-councillor. How the
deuce has that happened?&rdquo;</p>

<p>He began to cough discreetly near it, but the
nose paid him not the least attention.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Honourable sir,&rdquo; said Kovaloff at last,
plucking up courage, &ldquo;honourable sir.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;What do you want?&rdquo; asked the nose, and
turned round.</p>

<p>&ldquo;It seems to me strange, most respected sir&mdash;you
should know where you belong&mdash;and I find
you all of a sudden&mdash;where? Judge yourself.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Pardon me, I do not understand what you
are talking about. Explain yourself more distinctly.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;How shall I make my meaning plainer to
him?&rdquo; Then plucking up fresh courage, he
continued, &ldquo;Naturally&mdash;besides I am a Major.
You must admit it is not befitting that I should
go about without a nose. An old apple-woman
on the Ascension Bridge may carry on her business
without one, but since I am on the look out
for a post; besides in many houses I am acquainted
with ladies of high position&mdash;Madame
Tchektyriev, wife of a state-councillor, and
many others. So you see&mdash;I do not know,
honourable sir, what you<span style="white-space: nowrap;">&mdash;&mdash;</span>&rdquo; (here the Major
shrugged his shoulders). &ldquo;Pardon me; if one
regards the matter from the point of view of
duty and honour&mdash;you will yourself understand<span style="white-space: nowrap;">&mdash;&mdash;</span>&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;I understand nothing,&rdquo; answered the nose.
&ldquo;I repeat, please explain yourself more distinctly.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Honourable sir,&rdquo; said Kovaloff with
dignity, &ldquo;I do not know how I am to understand
your words. It seems to me the matter is as
clear as possible. Or do you wish&mdash;but you are
after all my own nose!&rdquo;</p>

<p>The nose looked at the Major and wrinkled its
forehead. &ldquo;There you are wrong, respected
sir; I am myself. Besides, there can be no close

relations between us. To judge by the buttons
of your uniform, you must be in quite a different
department to mine.&rdquo; So saying, the nose
turned away.</p>

<p>Kovaloff was completely puzzled; he did not
know what to do, and still less what to think.
At this moment he heard the pleasant rustling of
a lady's dress, and there approached an elderly
lady wearing a quantity of lace, and by her side
her graceful daughter in a white dress which set
off her slender figure to advantage, and wearing
a light straw hat. Behind the ladies marched a
tall lackey with long whiskers.</p>

<p>Kovaloff advanced a few steps, adjusted his
cambric collar, arranged his seals which hung
by a little gold chain, and with smiling face fixed
his eyes on the graceful lady, who bowed lightly
like a spring flower, and raised to her brow
her little white hand with transparent fingers.
He smiled still more when he spied under the
brim of her hat her little round chin, and part
of her cheek faintly tinted with rose-colour.
But suddenly he sprang back as though he had
been scorched. He remembered that he had
nothing but an absolute blank in place of a nose,
and tears started to his eyes. He turned round
in order to tell the gentleman in uniform that he
was only a state-councillor in appearance, but
really a scoundrel and a rascal, and nothing else
but his own nose; but the nose was no longer

there. He had had time to go, doubtless in
order to continue his visits.</p>

<p>His disappearance plunged Kovaloff into
despair. He went back and stood for a moment
under a colonnade, looking round him on all
sides in hope of perceiving the nose somewhere.
He remembered very well that it wore a hat with
a plume in it and a gold-embroidered uniform;
but he had not noticed the shape of the cloak,
nor the colour of the carriages and the horses,
nor even whether a lackey stood behind it, and,
if so, what sort of livery he wore. Moreover,
so many carriages were passing that it would
have been difficult to recognise one, and even if
he had done so, there would have been no means
of stopping it.</p>

<p>The day was fine and sunny. An immense
crowd was passing to and fro in the Neffsky
Avenue; a variegated stream of ladies flowed
along the pavement. There was his acquaintance,
the Privy Councillor, whom he was accustomed
to style &ldquo;General,&rdquo; especially when
strangers were present. There was Iarygin, his
intimate friend who always lost in the evenings
at whist; and there another Major, who had
obtained the rank of committee-man in the
Caucasus, beckoned to him.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Go to the deuce!&rdquo; said Kovaloff <i lang="it" xml:lang="it">sotto voce</i>.
&ldquo;Hi! coachman, drive me straight to the superintendent
of police.&rdquo; So saying, he got into a

droshky and continued to shout all the time to
the coachman &ldquo;Drive hard!&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Is the police superintendent at home?&rdquo; he
asked on entering the front hall.</p>

<p>&ldquo;No, sir,&rdquo; answered the porter, &ldquo;he has just
gone out.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Ah, just as I thought!&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Yes,&rdquo; continued the porter, &ldquo;he has only
just gone out; if you had been a moment
earlier you would perhaps have caught
him.&rdquo;</p>

<p>Kovaloff, still holding his handkerchief to his
face, re-entered the droshky and cried in a
despairing voice &ldquo;Drive on!&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Where?&rdquo; asked the coachman.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Straight on!&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;But how? There are cross-roads here.
Shall I go to the right or the left?&rdquo;</p>

<p>This question made Kovaloff reflect. In his
situation it was necessary to have recourse to the
police; not because the affair had anything to do
with them directly but because they acted more
promptly than other authorities. As for demanding
any explanation from the department
to which the nose claimed to belong, it would,
he felt, be useless, for the answers of that
gentleman showed that he regarded nothing as
sacred, and he might just as likely have lied in
this matter as in saying that he had never seen
Kovaloff.</p>

<p>But just as he was about to order the coachman
to drive to the police-station, the idea
occurred to him that this rascally scoundrel who,
at their first meeting, had behaved so disloyally
towards him, might, profiting by the delay, quit
the city secretly; and then all his searching would
be in vain, or might last over a whole month.
Finally, as though visited with a heavenly inspiration,
he resolved to go directly to an advertisement
office, and to advertise the loss of his
nose, giving all its distinctive characteristics in
detail, so that anyone who found it might bring
it at once to him, or at any rate inform him
where it lived. Having decided on this course,
he ordered the coachman to drive to the advertisement
office, and all the way he continued to
punch him in the back&mdash;&ldquo;Quick, scoundrel!
quick!&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Yes, sir!&rdquo; answered the coachman, lashing
his shaggy horse with the reins.</p>

<p>At last they arrived, and Kovaloff, out of
breath, rushed into a little room where a grey-haired
official, in an old coat and with spectacles
on his nose, sat at a table holding his pen
between his teeth, counting a heap of copper
coins.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Who takes in the advertisements here?&rdquo;
exclaimed Kovaloff.</p>

<p>&ldquo;At your service, sir,&rdquo; answered the grey-haired
functionary, looking up and then fastening

his eyes again on the heap of coins before
him.</p>

<p>&ldquo;I wish to place an advertisement in your
paper<span style="white-space: nowrap;">&mdash;&mdash;</span>&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Have the kindness to wait a minute,&rdquo;
answered the official, putting down figures on
paper with one hand, and with the other moving
two balls on his calculating-frame.</p>

<p>A lackey, whose silver-laced coat showed that
he served in one of the houses of the nobility,
was standing by the table with a note in his hand,
and speaking in a lively tone, by way of showing
himself sociable. &ldquo;Would you believe it, sir,
this little dog is really not worth twenty-four
kopecks, and for my own part I would not give a
farthing for it; but the countess is quite gone
upon it, and offers a hundred roubles' reward to
anyone who finds it. To tell you the truth, the
tastes of these people are very different from
ours; they don't mind giving five hundred or a
thousand roubles for a poodle or a pointer,
provided it be a good one.&rdquo;</p>

<p>The official listened with a serious air while
counting the number of letters contained in the
note. At either side of the table stood a number
of housekeepers, clerks and porters, carrying
notes. The writer of one wished to sell a
barouche, which had been brought from Paris
in 1814 and had been very little used; others
wanted to dispose of a strong droshky which

wanted one spring, a spirited horse seventeen
years old, and so on. The room where these
people were collected was very small, and the air
was very close; but Kovaloff was not affected by
it, for he had covered his face with a handkerchief,
and because his nose itself was heaven
knew where.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Sir, allow me to ask you&mdash;I am in a great
hurry,&rdquo; he said at last impatiently.</p>

<p>&ldquo;In a moment! In a moment! Two roubles,
twenty-four kopecks&mdash;one minute! One rouble,
sixty-four kopecks!&rdquo; said the grey-haired
official, throwing their notes back to the housekeepers
and porters. &ldquo;What do you wish?&rdquo; he
said, turning to Kovaloff.</p>

<p>&ldquo;I wish&mdash;&rdquo; answered the latter, &ldquo;I have just
been swindled and cheated, and I cannot get hold
of the perpetrator. I only want you to insert
an advertisement to say that whoever brings this
scoundrel to me will be well rewarded.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;What is your name, please?&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Why do you want my name? I have many
lady friends&mdash;Madame Tchektyriev, wife of a
state-councillor, Madame Podtotchina, wife of a
Colonel. Heaven forbid that they should get to
hear of it. You can simply write &lsquo;committee-man,&rsquo;
or, better, &lsquo;Major.&rsquo;&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;And the man who has run away is your
serf.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Serf! If he was, it would not be such a

great swindle! It is the nose which has
absconded.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;H'm! What a strange name. And this
Mr Nose has stolen from you a considerable
sum?&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Mr Nose! Ah, you don't understand me!
It is my own nose which has gone, I don't know
where. The devil has played a trick on me.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;How has it disappeared? I don't understand.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;I can't tell you how, but the important point
is that now it walks about the city itself a state-councillor.
That is why I want you to advertise
that whoever gets hold of it should bring it as
soon as possible to me. Consider; how can I
live without such a prominent part of my body?
It is not as if it were merely a little toe; I would
only have to put my foot in my boot and no one
would notice its absence. Every Thursday I
call on the wife of M. Tchektyriev, the state-councillor;
Madame Podtotchina, a Colonel's
wife who has a very pretty daughter, is one of
my acquaintances; and what am I to do now?
I cannot appear before them like this.&rdquo;</p>

<p>The official compressed his lips and reflected.
&ldquo;No, I cannot insert an advertisement like
that,&rdquo; he said after a long pause.</p>

<p>&ldquo;What! Why not?&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Because it might compromise the paper.
Suppose everyone could advertise that his nose

was lost. People already say that all sorts of
nonsense and lies are inserted.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;But this is not nonsense! There is nothing
of that sort in my case.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;You think so? Listen a minute. Last
week there was a case very like it. An official
came, just as you have done, bringing an advertisement
for the insertion of which he paid two
roubles, sixty-three kopecks; and this advertisement
simply announced the loss of a black-haired
poodle. There did not seem to be anything out
of the way in it, but it was really a satire; by the
poodle was meant the cashier of some establishment
or other.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;But I am not talking of a poodle, but my
own nose; i.e. almost myself.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;No, I cannot insert your advertisement.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;But my nose really has disappeared!&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;That is a matter for a doctor. There are
said to be people who can provide you with any
kind of nose you like. But I see that you are a
witty man, and like to have your little joke.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;But I swear to you on my word of honour.
Look at my face yourself.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Why put yourself out?&rdquo; continued the
official, taking a pinch of snuff. &ldquo;All the same,
if you don't mind,&rdquo; he added with a touch of
curiosity, &ldquo;I should like to have a look at it.&rdquo;</p>

<p>The committee-man removed the handkerchief
from before his face.</p>

<p>&ldquo;It certainly does look odd,&rdquo; said the official.
&ldquo;It is perfectly flat like a freshly fried pancake.
It is hardly credible.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Very well. Are you going to hesitate
any more? You see it is impossible to refuse
to advertise my loss. I shall be particularly
obliged to you, and I shall be glad that this
incident has procured me the pleasure of making
your acquaintance.&rdquo; The Major, we see, did
not even shrink from a slight humiliation.</p>

<p>&ldquo;It certainly is not difficult to advertise it,&rdquo;
replied the official; &ldquo;but I don't see what good
it would do you. However, if you lay so much
stress on it, you should apply to someone who
has a skilful pen, so that he may describe it as a
curious, natural freak, and publish the article in
the <i>Northern Bee</i>&rdquo; (here he took another pinch)
&ldquo;for the benefit of youthful readers&rdquo; (he wiped
his nose), &ldquo;or simply as a matter worthy of
arousing public curiosity.&rdquo;</p>

<p>The committee-man felt completely discouraged.
He let his eyes fall absent-mindedly on
a daily paper in which theatrical performances
were advertised. Reading there the name of
an actress whom he knew to be pretty, he involuntarily
smiled, and his hand sought his pocket
to see if he had a blue ticket&mdash;for in Kovaloff's
opinion superior officers like himself should not
take a lesser-priced seat; but the thought of his
lost nose suddenly spoilt everything.</p>

<p>The official himself seemed touched at his
difficult position. Desiring to console him, he
tried to express his sympathy by a few polite
words. &ldquo;I much regret,&rdquo; he said, &ldquo;your
extraordinary mishap. Will you not try a
pinch of snuff? It clears the head, banishes
depression, and is a good preventive against
<ins title="hæmorroids">hæmorrhoids</ins>.&rdquo;</p>

<p>So saying, he reached his snuff-box out to
Kovaloff, skilfully concealing at the same time
the cover, which was adorned with the portrait of
some lady or other.</p>

<p>This act, quite innocent in itself, exasperated
Kovaloff. &ldquo;I don't understand what you find to
joke about in the matter,&rdquo; he exclaimed angrily.
&ldquo;Don't you see that I lack precisely the essential
feature for taking snuff? The devil take
your snuff-box. I don't want to look at snuff
now, not even the best, certainly not your vile
stuff!&rdquo;</p>

<p>So saying, he left the advertisement office in
a state of profound irritation, and went to the
commissary of police. He arrived just as this
dignitary was reclining on his couch, and saying
to himself with a sigh of satisfaction, &ldquo;Yes, I
shall make a nice little sum out of that.&rdquo;</p>

<p>It might be expected, therefore, that the
committee-man's visit would be quite inopportune.</p>

<p>This police commissary was a great patron of

all the arts and industries; but what he liked
above everything else was a cheque. &ldquo;It is a
thing,&rdquo; he used to say, &ldquo;to which it is not easy
to find an equivalent; it requires no food, it does
not take up much room, it stays in one's pocket,
and if it falls, it is not broken.&rdquo;</p>

<p>The commissary accorded Kovaloff a fairly
frigid reception, saying that the afternoon was
not the best time to come with a case, that nature
required one to rest a little after eating (this
showed the committee-man that the commissary
was acquainted with the aphorisms of the ancient
sages), and that respectable people did not have
their noses stolen.</p>

<p>The last allusion was too direct. We must
remember that Kovaloff was a very sensitive
man. He did not mind anything said against
him as an individual, but he could not endure
any reflection on his rank or social position. He
even believed that in comedies one might allow
attacks on junior officers, but never on their
seniors.</p>

<p>The commissary's reception of him hurt his
feelings so much that he raised his head proudly,
and said with dignity, &ldquo;After such insulting
expressions on your part, I have nothing more
to say.&rdquo; And he left the place.</p>

<p>He reached his house quite wearied out. It
was already growing dark. After all his fruitless
search, his room seemed to him melancholy

and even ugly. In the vestibule he saw his
valet Ivan stretched on the leather couch and
amusing himself by spitting at the ceiling, which
he did very cleverly, hitting every time the same
spot. His servant's equanimity enraged him;
he struck him on the forehead with his hat, and
said, &ldquo;You good-for-nothing, you are always
playing the fool!&rdquo;</p>

<p>Ivan rose quickly and hastened to take off his
master's cloak.</p>

<p>Once in his room, the Major, tired and depressed,
threw himself in an armchair and, after
sighing a while, began to soliloquise:</p>

<p>&ldquo;In heaven's name, why should such a misfortune
befall me? If I had lost an arm or a
leg, it would be less insupportable; but a man
without a nose! Devil take it!&mdash;what is he good
for? He is only fit to be thrown out of the
window. If it had been taken from me in war or
in a duel, or if I had lost it by my own fault!
But it has disappeared inexplicably. But no! it
is impossible,&rdquo; he continued after reflecting a few
moments, &ldquo;it is incredible that a nose can disappear
like that&mdash;quite incredible. I must be
dreaming, or suffering from some hallucination;
perhaps I swallowed, by mistake instead of
water, the brandy with which I rub my chin after
being shaved. That fool of an Ivan must have
forgotten to take it away, and I must have
swallowed it.&rdquo;</p>

<p>In order to find out whether he were really
drunk, the Major pinched himself so hard that
he unvoluntarily uttered a cry. The pain convinced
him that he was quite wide awake. He
walked slowly to the looking-glass and at first
closed his eyes, hoping to see his nose suddenly
in its proper place; but on opening them, he
started back. &ldquo;What a hideous sight!&rdquo; he
exclaimed.</p>

<p>It was really incomprehensible. One might
easily lose a button, a silver spoon, a watch, or
something similar; but a loss like this, and in
one's own dwelling!</p>

<p>After considering all the circumstances, Major
Kovaloff felt inclined to suppose that the cause
of all his trouble should be laid at the door of
Madame Podtotchina, the Colonel's wife, who
wished him to marry her daughter. He himself
paid her court readily, but always avoided
coming to the point. And when the lady one
day told him point-blank that she wished him
to marry her daughter, he gently drew back,
declaring that he was still too young, and that he
had to serve five years more before he would be
forty-two. This must be the reason why the
lady, in revenge, had resolved to bring him into
disgrace, and had hired two sorceresses for that
object. One thing was certain&mdash;his nose had
not been cut off; no one had entered his room,
and as for Ivan Jakovlevitch&mdash;he had been

shaved by him on Wednesday, and during that
day and the whole of Thursday his nose had
been there, as he knew and well remembered.
Moreover, if his nose had been cut off he
would naturally have felt pain, and doubtless
the wound would not have healed so quickly,
nor would the surface have been as flat as a
pancake.</p>

<p>All kinds of plans passed through his head:
should he bring a legal action against the wife
of a superior officer, or should he go to her and
charge her openly with her treachery?</p>

<p>His reflections were interrupted by a sudden
light, which shone through all the chinks of the
door, showing that Ivan had lit the wax-candles
in the vestibule. Soon Ivan himself came in
with the lights. Kovaloff quickly seized a handkerchief
and covered the place where his nose
had been the evening before, so that his blockhead
of a servant might not gape with his mouth
wide open when he saw his master's extraordinary
appearance.</p>

<p>Scarcely had Ivan returned to the vestibule
than a stranger's voice was heard there.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Does Major Kovaloff live here?&rdquo; it asked.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Come in!&rdquo; said the Major, rising rapidly
and opening the door.</p>

<p>He saw a police official of pleasant appearance,
with grey whiskers and fairly full cheeks&mdash;the
same who at the commencement of this story was

standing at the end of the Isaac Bridge. &ldquo;You
have lost your nose?&rdquo; he asked.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Exactly so.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;It has just been found.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;What&mdash;do you say?&rdquo; stammered Major
Kovaloff.</p>

<p>Joy had suddenly paralysed his tongue. He
stared at the police commissary on whose cheeks
and full lips fell the flickering light of the candle.</p>

<p>&ldquo;How was it?&rdquo; he asked at last.</p>

<p>&ldquo;By a very singular chance. It has been
arrested just as it was getting into a carriage for
Riga. Its passport had been made out some
time ago in the name of an official; and what is
still more strange, I myself took it at first for a
gentleman. Fortunately I had my glasses with
me, and then I saw at once that it was a nose.
I am shortsighted, you know, and as you stand
before me I cannot distinguish your nose, your
beard, or anything else. My mother-in-law can
hardly see at all.&rdquo;</p>

<p>Kovaloff was beside himself with excitement.
&ldquo;Where is it? Where? I will hasten there at
once.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Don't put yourself out. Knowing that you
need it, I have brought it with me. Another
singular thing is that the principal culprit in the
matter is a scoundrel of a barber living in the
Ascension Avenue, who is now safely locked up.
I had long suspected him of drunkenness and

theft; only the day before yesterday he stole
some buttons in a shop. Your nose is quite
uninjured.&rdquo; So saying, the police commissary
put his hand in his pocket and brought out the
nose wrapped up in paper.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Yes, yes, that is it!&rdquo; exclaimed Kovaloff.
&ldquo;Will you not stay and drink a cup of tea with
me?&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;I should like to very much, but I cannot.
I must go at once to the House of Correction.
The cost of living is very high nowadays. My
mother-in-law lives with me, and there are
several children; the eldest is very hopeful and
intelligent, but I have no means for their
education.&rdquo;</p>

<p>After the commissary's departure, Kovaloff
remained for some time plunged in a kind of
vague reverie, and did not recover full consciousness
for several moments, so great was the
effect of this unexpected good news. He placed
the recovered nose carefully in the palm of his
hand, and examined it again with the greatest
attention.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Yes, this is it!&rdquo; he said to himself. &ldquo;Here
is the heat-boil on the left side, which came out
yesterday.&rdquo; And he nearly laughed aloud with
delight.</p>

<p>But nothing is permanent in this world. Joy
in the second moment of its arrival is already
less keen than in the first, is still fainter in the

third, and finishes by coalescing with our normal
mental state, just as the circles which the fall of
a pebble forms on the surface of water, gradually
die away. Kovaloff began to meditate, and saw
that his difficulties were not yet over; his nose
had been recovered, but it had to be joined on
again in its proper place.</p>

<p>And suppose it could not? As he put this
question to himself, Kovaloff grew pale. With
a feeling of indescribable dread, he rushed
towards his dressing-table, and stood before the
mirror in order that he might not place his nose
crookedly. His hands trembled.</p>

<p>Very carefully he placed it where it had been
before. Horror! It did not remain there.
He held it to his mouth and warmed it a little
with his breath, and then placed it there again;
but it would not hold.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Hold on, you stupid!&rdquo; he said.</p>

<p>But the nose seemed to be made of wood, and
fell back on the table with a strange noise, as
though it had been a cork. The Major's face
began to twitch feverishly. &ldquo;Is it possible that
it won't stick?&rdquo; he asked himself, full of alarm.
But however often he tried, all his efforts were
in vain.</p>

<p>He called Ivan, and sent him to fetch the
doctor who occupied the finest flat in the
mansion. This doctor was a man of imposing
appearance, who had magnificent black whiskers

and a healthy wife. He ate fresh apples every
morning, and cleaned his teeth with extreme
care, using five different tooth-brushes for three-quarters
of an hour daily.</p>

<p>The doctor came immediately. After having
asked the Major when this misfortune had happened,
he raised his chin and gave him a fillip
with his finger just where the nose had been, in
such a way that the Major suddenly threw back
his head and struck the wall with it. The doctor
said that did not matter; then, making him turn
his face to the right, he felt the vacant place and
said &ldquo;H'm!&rdquo; then he made him turn it to the
left and did the same; finally he again gave him
a fillip with his finger, so that the Major started
like a horse whose teeth are being examined.
After this experiment, the doctor shook his head
and said, &ldquo;No, it cannot be done. Rather
remain as you are, lest something worse happen.
Certainly one could replace it at once, but I
assure you the remedy would be worse than the
disease.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;All very fine, but how am I to go on without
a nose?&rdquo; answered Kovaloff. &ldquo;There is
nothing worse than that. How can I show
myself with such a villainous appearance? I go
into good society, and this evening I am invited
to two parties. I know several ladies, Madame
Tchektyriev, the wife of a state-councillor,
Madame Podtotchina&mdash;although after what she

has done, I don't want to have anything to do
with her except through the agency of the police.
I beg you,&rdquo; continued Kovaloff in a supplicating
tone, &ldquo;find some way or other of replacing it;
even if it is not quite firm, as long as it holds at
all; I can keep it in place sometimes with my
hand, whenever there is any risk. Besides, I
do not even dance, so that it is not likely to be
injured by any sudden movement. As to your
fee, be in no anxiety about that; I can well
afford it.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Believe me,&rdquo; answered the doctor in a voice
which was neither too high nor too low, but soft
and almost magnetic, &ldquo;I do not treat patients
from love of gain. That would be contrary to
my principles and to my art. It is true that I
accept fees, but that is only not to hurt my
patients' feelings by refusing them. I could
certainly replace your nose, but I assure you on
my word of honour, it would only make matters
worse. Rather let Nature do her own work.
Wash the place often with cold water, and I
assure you that even without a nose, you will be
just as well as if you had one. As to the nose
itself, I advise you to have it preserved in a
bottle of spirits, or, still better, of warm vinegar
mixed with two spoonfuls of brandy, and then
you can sell it at a good price. I would be
willing to take it myself, provided you do not
ask too much.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;No, no, I shall not sell it at any price. I
would rather it were lost again.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Excuse me,&rdquo; said the doctor, taking his
leave. &ldquo;I hoped to be useful to you, but I can
do nothing more; you are at any rate convinced
of my good-will.&rdquo; So saying, the doctor left
the room with a dignified air.</p>

<p>Kovaloff did not even notice his departure.
Absorbed in a profound reverie, he only saw the
edge of his snow-white cuffs emerging from the
sleeves of his black coat.</p>

<p>The next day he resolved, before bringing a
formal action, to write to the Colonel's wife and
see whether she would not return to him, without
further dispute, that of which she had deprived
him.</p>

<p>The letter ran as follows:</p>

<blockquote>
<p class="no-indent">&ldquo;To <span class="small-caps">Madame Alexandra Podtotchina</span>,</p>

<p>&ldquo;I hardly understand your method of action.
Be sure that by adopting such a course you will
gain nothing, and will certainly not succeed in
making me marry your daughter. Believe me,
the story of my nose has become well known; it
is you and no one else who have taken the principal
part in it. Its unexpected separation from
the place which it occupied, its flight and its
appearances sometimes in the disguise of an
official, sometimes in proper person, are nothing
but the consequence of unholy spells employed
by you or by persons who, like you, are addicted
to such honourable pursuits. On my part, I wish
to inform you, that if the above-mentioned nose
is not restored to-day to its proper place, I shall
be obliged to have recourse to legal procedure.</p>

<p>&ldquo;For the rest, with all respect, I have the
honour to be your humble servant,</p>

<p class="right">&ldquo;<span class="small-caps">Platon Kovaloff</span>.&rdquo;</p>
</blockquote>

<p>The reply was not long in coming, and was as
follows:</p>

<blockquote>
<p class="no-indent">&ldquo;Major <span class="small-caps">Platon Kovaloff</span>,&mdash;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Your letter has profoundly astonished me.
I must confess that I had not expected such
unjust reproaches on your part. I assure you
that the official of whom you speak has not been
at my house, either disguised or in his proper
person. It is true that Philippe Ivanovitch
Potantchikoff has paid visits at my house, and
though he has actually asked for my daughter's
hand, and was a man of good breeding, respectable
and intelligent, I never gave him any hope.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Again, you say something about a nose.
If you intend to imply by that that I wished to
snub you, i.e. to meet you with a refusal, I am
very astonished because, as you well know, I was
quite of the opposite mind. If after this you
wish to ask for my daughter's hand, I should be
glad to gratify you, for such has also been the
object of my most fervent desire, in the hope of
the accomplishment of which, I remain, yours
most sincerely,</p>

<p class="right">&ldquo;<span class="small-caps">Alexandra Podtotchina</span>.&rdquo;</p>
</blockquote>

<p>&ldquo;No,&rdquo; said Kovaloff, after having reperused
the letter, &ldquo;she is certainly not guilty. It is
impossible. Such a letter could not be written
by a criminal.&rdquo; The committee-man was experienced
in such matters, for he had been often
officially deputed to conduct criminal investigations
while in the Caucasus. &ldquo;But then how
and by what trick of fate has the thing happened?&rdquo;
he said to himself with a gesture of
discouragement. &ldquo;The devil must be at the
bottom of it.&rdquo;</p>

<p>Meanwhile the rumour of this extraordinary
event had spread all over the city, and, as is
generally the case, not without numerous additions.
At that period there was a general disposition
to believe in the miraculous; the public
had recently been impressed by experiments in
magnetism. The story of the floating chairs in
Koniouchennaia Street was still quite recent,
and there was nothing astonishing in hearing
soon afterwards that Major Kovaloff's nose was
to be seen walking every day at three o'clock
on the Neffsky Avenue. The crowd of curious
spectators which gathered there daily was enormous.
On one occasion someone spread a report
that the nose was in Junker's stores and immediately

the place was besieged by such a crowd
that the police had to interfere and establish
order. A certain speculator with a grave, whiskered
face, who sold cakes at a theatre door,
had some strong wooden benches made which
he placed before the window of the stores, and
obligingly invited the public to stand on them
and look in, at the modest charge of twenty-four
kopecks. A veteran colonel, leaving his house
earlier than usual expressly for the purpose, had
the greatest difficulty in elbowing his way through
the crowd, but to his great indignation he saw
nothing in the store window but an ordinary
flannel waistcoat and a coloured lithograph
representing a young girl darning a stocking,
while an elegant youth in a waistcoat with large
lappels watched her from behind a tree. The
picture had hung in the same place for more
than ten years. The colonel went off, growling
savagely to himself, &ldquo;How can the fools let
themselves be excited by such idiotic stories?&rdquo;</p>

<p>Then another rumour got abroad, to the effect
that the nose of Major Kovaloff was in the habit
of walking not on the Neffsky Avenue but in the
Tauris Gardens. Some students of the Academy
of Surgery went there on purpose to see it. A
high-born lady wrote to the keeper of the gardens
asking him to show her children this rare phenomenon,
and to give them some suitable instruction
on the occasion.</p>

<p>All these incidents were eagerly collected by
the town wits, who just then were very short
of anecdotes adapted to amuse ladies. On the
other hand, the minority of solid, sober people
were very much displeased. One gentleman
asserted with great indignation that he could not
understand how in our enlightened age such
absurdities could spread abroad, and he was
astonished that the Government did not direct
their attention to the matter. This gentleman
evidently belonged to the category of those
people who wish the Government to interfere in
everything, even in their daily quarrels with their
wives.</p>

<p>But here the course of events is again obscured
by a veil.</p>

<h3>III</h3>

<p>Strange events happen in this world, events
which are sometimes entirely improbable. The
same nose which had masqueraded as a state-councillor,
and caused so much sensation in the
town, was found one morning in its proper place,
i.e. between the cheeks of Major Kovaloff, as if
nothing had happened.</p>

<p>This occurred on 7th April. On awaking, the
Major looked by chance into a mirror and <ins title="percieved">perceived</ins>
a nose. He quickly put his hand to it; it
was there beyond a doubt!</p>

<p>&ldquo;Oh!&rdquo; exclaimed Kovaloff. For sheer joy

he was on the point of performing a dance barefooted
across his room, but the entrance of Ivan
prevented him. He told him to bring water,
and after washing himself, he looked again in
the glass. The nose was there! Then he dried
his face with a towel and looked again. Yes,
there was no mistake about it!</p>

<p>&ldquo;Look here, Ivan, it seems to me that I have
a heat-boil on my nose,&rdquo; he said to his valet.</p>

<p>And he thought to himself at the same time,
&ldquo;That will be a nice business if Ivan says to
me &lsquo;No, sir, not only is there no boil, but your
nose itself is not there!&rsquo;&rdquo;</p>

<p>But Ivan answered, &ldquo;There is nothing, sir;
I can see no boil on your nose.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Good! Good!&rdquo; exclaimed the Major, and
snapped his fingers with delight.</p>

<p>At this moment the barber, Ivan Jakovlevitch,
put his head in at the door, but as timidly as a
cat which has just been beaten for stealing lard.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Tell me first, are your hands clean?&rdquo; asked
Kovaloff when he saw him.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Yes, sir.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;You lie.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;I swear they are perfectly clean, sir.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Very well; then come here.&rdquo;</p>

<p>Kovaloff seated himself. Jakovlevitch tied a
napkin under his chin, and in the twinkling of an
eye covered his beard and part of his cheeks with
a copious creamy lather.</p>

<p>&ldquo;There it is!&rdquo; said the barber to himself, as
he glanced at the nose. Then he bent his head
a little and examined it from one side. &ldquo;Yes,
it actually is the nose&mdash;really, when one
thinks<span style="white-space: nowrap;">&mdash;&mdash;</span>&rdquo; he continued, pursuing his mental
soliloquy and still looking at it. Then quite
gently, with infinite precaution, he raised two
fingers in the air in order to take hold of it by
the extremity, as he was accustomed to do.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Now then, take care!&rdquo; Kovaloff exclaimed.</p>

<p>Ivan Jakovlevitch let his arm fall and felt more
embarrassed than he had ever done in his life.
At last he began to pass the razor very lightly
over the Major's chin, and although it was very
difficult to shave him without using the olfactory
organ as a point of support, he succeeded, however,
by placing his wrinkled thumb against the
Major's lower jaw and cheek, thus overcoming
all obstacles and bringing his task to a safe
conclusion.</p>

<p>When the barber had finished, Kovaloff hastened
to dress himself, took a droshky, and drove
straight to the confectioner's. As he entered it,
he ordered a cup of chocolate. He then stepped
straight to the mirror; the nose was there!</p>

<p>He returned joyfully, and regarded with a
satirical expression two officers who were in the
shop, one of whom possessed a nose not much
larger than a waistcoat button.</p>

<p>After that he went to the office of the department

where he had applied for the post of vice-governor
of a province or Government bailiff.
As he passed through the hall of reception, he
cast a glance at the mirror; the nose was there!
Then he went to pay a visit to another committee-man,
a very sarcastic personage, to whom he was
accustomed to say in answer to his raillery,
&ldquo;Yes, I know, you are the funniest fellow in
St Petersburg.&rdquo;</p>

<p>On the way he said to himself, &ldquo;If the Major
does not burst into laughter at the sight of me,
that is a most certain sign that everything is in
its accustomed place.&rdquo;</p>

<p>But the Major said nothing. &ldquo;Very good!&rdquo;
thought Kovaloff.</p>

<p>As he returned, he met Madame Podtotchina
with her daughter. He accosted them, and they
responded very graciously. The conversation
lasted a long time, during which he took more
than one pinch of snuff, saying to himself, &ldquo;No,
you haven't caught me yet, coquettes that you
are! And as to the daughter, I shan't marry
her at all.&rdquo;</p>

<p>After that, the Major resumed his walks on
the Neffsky Avenue and his visits to the theatre
as if nothing had happened. His nose also
remained in its place as if it had never quitted it.
From that time he was always to be seen smiling,
in a good humour, and paying attentions to pretty
girls.</p>

<h3>IV</h3>

<p>Such was the occurrence which took place in
the northern capital of our vast empire. On
considering the account carefully we see that
there is a good deal which looks improbable about
it. Not to speak of the strange disappearance of
the nose, and its appearance in different places
under the disguise of a councillor of state, how
was it that Kovaloff did not understand that one
cannot decently advertise for a lost nose? I do
not mean to say that he would have had to pay
too much for the advertisement&mdash;that is a mere
trifle, and I am not one of those who attach too
much importance to money; but to advertise in
such a case is not proper nor befitting.</p>

<p>Another difficulty is&mdash;how was the nose found
in the baked loaf, and how did Ivan Jakovlevitch
himself&mdash;no, I don't understand it at all!</p>

<p>But the most incomprehensible thing of all is,
how authors can choose such subjects for their
stories. That really surpasses my understanding.
In the first place, no advantage results
from it for the country; and in the second place,
no harm results either.</p>

<p>All the same, when one reflects well, there
really is something in the matter. Whatever
may be said to the contrary, such cases do occur&mdash;rarely,
it is true, but now and then actually.</p>

<h2>MEMOIRS OF A MADMAN</h2>

<p class="no-indent"><i>October 3rd.</i>&mdash;A strange occurrence has taken
place to-day. I got up fairly late, and when
Mawra brought me my clean boots, I asked her
how late it was. When I heard it had long
struck ten, I dressed as quickly as possible.</p>

<p>To tell the truth, I would rather not have gone
to the office at all to-day, for I know beforehand
that our department-chief will look as sour as
vinegar. For some time past he has been in the
habit of saying to me, &ldquo;Look here, my friend;
there is something wrong with your head. You
often rush about as though you were possessed.
Then you make such confused abstracts of the
documents that the devil himself cannot make
them out; you write the title without any capital
letters, and add neither the date nor the docket-number.&rdquo;
The long-legged scoundrel! He is
certainly envious of me, because I sit in the
director's work-room, and mend His Excellency's
pens. In a word, I should not have gone
to the office if I had not hoped to meet the
accountant, and perhaps squeeze a little advance
out of this skinflint.</p>

<p>A terrible man, this accountant! As for his
advancing one's salary once in a way&mdash;you might
sooner expect the skies to fall. You may beg
and beseech him, and be on the very verge of
ruin&mdash;this grey devil won't budge an inch. At
the same time, his own cook at home, as all the
world knows, boxes his ears.</p>

<p>I really don't see what good one gets by
serving in our department. There are no plums
there. In the fiscal and judicial offices it is quite
different. There some ungainly fellow sits in a
corner and writes and writes; he has such a
shabby coat and such an ugly mug that one would
like to spit on both of them. But you should see
what a splendid country-house he has rented.
He would not condescend to accept a gilt porcelain
cup as a present. &ldquo;You can give that to
your family doctor,&rdquo; he would say. Nothing
less than a pair of chestnut horses, a fine carriage,
or a beaver-fur coat worth three hundred
roubles would be good enough for him. And
yet he seems so mild and quiet, and asks so
amiably, &ldquo;Please lend me your penknife; I wish
to mend my pen.&rdquo; Nevertheless, he knows how
to scarify a petitioner till he has hardly a whole
stitch left on his body.</p>

<p>In our office it must be admitted everything is
done in a proper and gentlemanly way; there
is more cleanness and elegance than one will
ever find in Government offices. The tables

are mahogany, and everyone is addressed as
&ldquo;sir.&rdquo; And truly, were it not for this official
propriety, I should long ago have sent in my
resignation.</p>

<p>I put on my old cloak, and took my umbrella,
as a light rain was falling. No one was to be
seen on the streets except some women, who had
flung their skirts over their heads. Here and
there one saw a cabman or a shopman with his
umbrella up. Of the higher classes one only
saw an official here and there. One I saw at the
street-crossing, and thought to myself, &ldquo;Ah!
my friend, you are not going to the office, but
after that young lady who walks in front of you.
You are just like the officers who run after every
petticoat they see.&rdquo;</p>

<p>As I was thus following the train of my
thoughts, I saw a carriage stop before a shop just
as I was passing it. I recognised it at once; it
was our director's carriage. &ldquo;He has nothing
to do in the shop,&rdquo; I said to myself; &ldquo;it must be
his daughter.&rdquo;</p>

<p>I pressed myself close against the wall. A
lackey opened the carriage door, and, as I had
expected, she fluttered like a bird out of it.
How proudly she looked right and left; how she
drew her eyebrows together, and shot lightnings
from her eyes&mdash;good heavens! I am lost, hopelessly
lost!</p>

<p>But why must she come out in such abominable

weather? And yet they say women are so mad
on their finery!</p>

<p>She did not recognise me. I had wrapped
myself as closely as possible in my cloak. It
was dirty and old-fashioned, and I would not
have liked to have been seen by her wearing it.
Now they wear cloaks with long collars, but
mine has only a short double collar, and the
cloth is of inferior quality.</p>

<p>Her little dog could not get into the shop, and
remained outside. I know this dog; its name is
&ldquo;Meggy.&rdquo;</p>

<p>Before I had been standing there a minute, I
heard a voice call, &ldquo;Good day, Meggy!&rdquo;</p>

<p>Who the deuce was that? I looked round
and saw two ladies hurrying by under an umbrella&mdash;one
old, the other fairly young. They
had already passed me when I heard the same
voice say again, &ldquo;For shame, Meggy!&rdquo;</p>

<p>What was that? I saw Meggy sniffing at a
dog which ran behind the ladies. The deuce!
I thought to myself, &ldquo;I am not drunk? That
happens pretty seldom.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;No, Fidel, you are wrong,&rdquo; I heard Meggy
say quite distinctly. &ldquo;I was&mdash;bow&mdash;wow!&mdash;I
was&mdash;bow! wow! wow!&mdash;very ill.&rdquo;</p>

<p>What an extraordinary dog! I was, to tell
the truth, quite amazed to hear it talk human
language. But when I considered the matter
well, I ceased to be astonished. In fact, such

things have already happened in the world. It
is said that in England a fish put its head out of
water and said a word or two in such an extraordinary
language that learned men have been
puzzling over them for three years, and have not
succeeded in interpreting them yet. I also read
in the paper of two cows who entered a shop and
asked for a pound of tea.</p>

<p>Meanwhile what Meggy went on to say seemed
to me still more remarkable. She added, &ldquo;I
wrote to you lately, Fidel; perhaps Polkan did
not bring you the letter.&rdquo;</p>

<p>Now I am willing to forfeit a whole month's
salary if I ever heard of dogs writing before.
This has certainly astonished me. For some
little time past I hear and see things which no
other man has heard and seen.</p>

<p>&ldquo;I will,&rdquo; I thought, &ldquo;follow that dog in
order to get to the bottom of the matter.
Accordingly, I opened my umbrella and went
after the two ladies. They went down Bean
Street, turned through Citizen Street and Carpenter
Street, and finally halted on the Cuckoo
Bridge before a large house. I know this house;
it is Sverkoff's. What a monster he is! What
sort of people live there! How many cooks,
how many bagmen! There are brother officials
of mine also there packed on each other like
herrings. And I have a friend there, a fine
player on the cornet.&rdquo;</p>

<p>The ladies mounted to the fifth story. &ldquo;Very
good,&rdquo; thought I; &ldquo;I will make a note of the
number, in order to follow up the matter at the
first opportunity.&rdquo;</p>

<hr class="space-break"/>

<p><i>October 4th.</i>&mdash;To-day is Wednesday, and I
was as usual in the office. I came early on
purpose, sat down, and mended all the pens.</p>

<p>Our director must be a very clever man.
The whole room is full of bookcases. I read the
titles of some of the books; they were very
learned, beyond the comprehension of people
of my class, and all in French and German. I
look at his face; see! how much dignity there is
in his eyes. I never hear a single superfluous
word from his mouth, except that when he hands
over the documents, he asks &ldquo;What sort of
weather is it?&rdquo;</p>

<p>No, he is not a man of our class; he is a real
statesman. I have already noticed that I am a
special favourite of his. If now his daughter
also&mdash;ah! what folly&mdash;let me say no more about
it!</p>

<p>I have read the <i>Northern Bee</i>. What foolish
people the French are! By heavens! I should
like to tackle them all, and give them a thrashing.
I have also read a fine description of a
ball given by a landowner of Kursk. The landowners
of Kursk write a fine style.</p>

<p>Then I noticed that it was already half-past

twelve, and the director had not yet left his
bedroom. But about half-past one something
happened which no pen can describe.</p>

<p>The door opened. I thought it was the
director; I jumped up with my documents from
the seat, and&mdash;then&mdash;she&mdash;herself&mdash;came into
the room. Ye saints! how beautifully she was
dressed. Her garments were whiter than a
swan's plumage&mdash;oh how splendid! A sun,
indeed, a real sun!</p>

<p>She greeted me and asked, &ldquo;Has not my
father come yet?&rdquo;</p>

<p>Ah! what a voice. A canary bird! A real
canary bird!</p>

<p>&ldquo;Your Excellency,&rdquo; I wanted to exclaim,
&ldquo;don't have me executed, but if it must be
done, then kill me rather with your own angelic
hand.&rdquo; But, God knows why, I could not bring
it out, so I only said, &ldquo;No, he has not come yet.&rdquo;</p>

<p>She glanced at me, looked at the books, and
let her handkerchief fall. Instantly I started
up, but slipped on the infernal polished floor,
and nearly broke my nose. Still I succeeded
in picking up the handkerchief. Ye heavenly
choirs, what a handkerchief! So tender and
soft, of the finest cambric. It had the scent of
a general's rank!</p>

<p>She thanked me, and smiled so amiably that
her sugar lips nearly melted. Then she left the
room.</p>

<p>After I had sat there about an hour, a flunkey
came in and said, &ldquo;You can go home, Mr
Ivanovitch; the director has already gone out!&rdquo;</p>

<p>I cannot stand these lackeys! They hang
about the vestibules, and scarcely vouchsafe to
greet one with a nod. Yes, sometimes it is even
worse; once one of these rascals offered me his
snuff-box without even getting up from his chair.
&ldquo;Don't you know then, you country-bumpkin,
that I am an official and of aristocratic birth?&rdquo;</p>

<p>This time, however, I took my hat and overcoat
quietly; these people naturally never think
of helping one on with it. I went home, lay a
good while on the bed, and wrote some verses
in my note:</p>

<div class="poetry width175">
<div class="stanza">
<div class="line">&ldquo;'Tis an hour since I saw thee,<br/></div>
<div class="line indent3">And it seems a whole long year;<br/></div>
<div class="line indent1">If I loathe my own existence,<br/></div>
<div class="line indent3">How can I live on, my dear?&rdquo;<br/></div>
</div>
</div>

<p class="no-indent">I think they are by Pushkin.</p>

<p>In the evening I wrapped myself in my cloak,
hastened to the director's house, and waited
there a long time to see if she would come out
and get into the carriage. I only wanted to see
her once, but she did not come.</p>

<hr class="space-break"/>

<p><i>November 6th.</i>&mdash;Our chief clerk has gone
mad. When I came to the office to-day he called
me to his room and began as follows: &ldquo;Look
here, my friend, what wild ideas have got into
your head?&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;How! What? None at all,&rdquo; I answered.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Consider well. You are already past forty;
it is quite time to be reasonable. What do you
imagine? Do you think I don't know all your
tricks? Are you trying to pay court to the
director's daughter? Look at yourself and
realise what you are! A nonentity, nothing else.
I would not give a kopeck for you. Look well
in the glass. How can you have such thoughts
with such a caricature of a face?&rdquo;</p>

<p>May the devil take him! Because his own
face has a certain resemblance to a medicine-bottle,
because he has a curly bush of hair on
his head, and sometimes combs it upwards, and
sometimes plasters it down in all kinds of queer
ways, he thinks that he can do everything. I
know well, I know why he is angry with me.
He is envious; perhaps he has noticed the tokens
of favour which have been graciously shown me.
But why should I bother about him? A councillor!
What sort of important animal is that?
He wears a gold chain with his watch, buys
himself boots at thirty roubles a pair; may the
deuce take him! Am I a tailor's son or some
other obscure cabbage? I am a nobleman! I
can also work my way up. I am just forty-two&mdash;an
age when a man's real career generally
begins. Wait a bit, my friend! I too may get
to a superior's rank; or perhaps, if God is
gracious, even to a higher one. I shall make a

name which will far outstrip yours. You think
there are no able men except yourself? I only
need to order a fashionable coat and wear a tie
like yours, and you would be quite eclipsed.</p>

<p>But I have no money&mdash;that is the worst part
of it!</p>

<hr class="space-break"/>

<p><i>November 8th.</i>&mdash;I was at the theatre. &ldquo;The
Russian House-Fool&rdquo; was performed. I laughed
heartily. There was also a kind of musical
comedy which contained amusing hits at barristers.
The language was very broad; I wonder
the censor passed it. In the comedy lines occur
which accuse the merchants of cheating; their
sons are said to lead immoral lives, and to
behave very disrespectfully towards the nobility.</p>

<p>The critics also are criticised; they are said
only to be able to find fault, so that authors have
to beg the public for protection.</p>

<p>Our modern dramatists certainly write amusing
things. I am very fond of the theatre. If
I have only a kopeck in my pocket, I always
go there. Most of my fellow-officials are uneducated
boors, and never enter a theatre unless
one throws free tickets at their head.</p>

<p>One actress sang divinely. I thought also of&mdash;but
silence!</p>

<hr class="space-break"/>

<p><i>November 9th.</i>&mdash;About eight o'clock I went to
the office. The chief clerk pretended not to
notice my arrival. I for my part also behaved

as though he were not in existence. I read
through and collated documents. About four
o'clock I left. I passed by the director's house,
but no one was to be seen. After dinner I lay
for a good while on the bed.</p>

<hr class="space-break"/>

<p><i>November 11th.</i>&mdash;To-day I sat in the director's
room, mended twenty-three pens for
him, and for Her&mdash;for Her Excellence, his
daughter, four more.</p>

<p>The director likes to see many pens lying on
his table. What a head he must have! He
continually wraps himself in silence, but I don't
think the smallest trifle escapes his eye. I should
like to know what he is generally thinking of,
what is really going on in this brain; I should like
to get acquainted with the whole manner of life
of these gentlemen, and get a closer view of their
cunning courtiers' arts, and all the activities of
these circles. I have often thought of asking His
Excellence about them; but&mdash;the deuce knows
why!&mdash;every time my tongue failed me and I
could get nothing out but my meteorological
report.</p>

<p>I wish I could get a look into the spare-room
whose door I so often see open. And a second
small room behind the spare-room excites my
curiosity. How splendidly it is fitted up; what a
quantity of mirrors and choice china it contains!
I should also like to cast a glance into those

regions where Her Excellency, the daughter,
wields the sceptre. I should like to see how all
the scent-bottles and boxes are arranged in her
boudoir, and the flowers which exhale so delicious
a scent that one is half afraid to breathe.
And her clothes lying about which are too
ethereal to be called clothes&mdash;but silence!</p>

<p>To-day there came to me what seemed a
heavenly inspiration. I remembered the conversation
between the two dogs which I had overheard
on the Nevski Prospect. &ldquo;Very good,&rdquo;
I thought; &ldquo;now I see my way clear. I must
get hold of the correspondence which these two
silly dogs have carried on with each other. In
it I shall probably find many things explained.&rdquo;</p>

<p>I had already once called Meggy to me and
said to her, &ldquo;Listen, Meggy! Now we are
alone together; if you like, I will also shut the
door so that no one can see us. Tell me now
all that you know about your mistress. I swear
to you that I will tell no one.&rdquo;</p>

<p>But the cunning dog drew in its tail, ruffled up
its hair, and went quite quietly out of the door,
as though it had heard nothing.</p>

<p>I had long been of the opinion that dogs are
much cleverer than men. I also believed that
they could talk, and that only a certain obstinacy
kept them from doing so. They are especially
watchful animals, and nothing escapes their
observation. Now, cost what it may, I will go

to-morrow to Sverkoff's house in order to ask
after Fidel, and if I have luck, to get hold of all
the letters which Meggy has written to her.</p>

<hr class="space-break"/>

<p><i>November 12th.</i>&mdash;To-day about two o'clock
in the afternoon I started in order, by some
means or other, to see Fidel and question her.</p>

<p>I cannot stand this smell of Sauerkraut which
assails one's olfactory nerves from all the shops
in Citizen Street. There also exhales such an
odour from under each house door, that one
must hold one's nose and pass by quickly.
There ascends also so much smoke and soot from
the artisans' shops that it is almost impossible to
get through it.</p>

<p>When I had climbed up to the sixth story,
and had rung the bell, a rather pretty girl with a
freckled face came out. I recognised her as the
companion of the old lady. She blushed a little
and asked &ldquo;What do you want?&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;I want to have a little conversation with your
dog.&rdquo;</p>

<p>She was a simple-minded girl, as I saw at once.
The dog came running and barking loudly. I
wanted to take hold of it, but the abominable
beast nearly caught hold of my nose with its
teeth. But in a corner of the room I saw its
sleeping-basket. Ah! that was what I wanted.
I went to it, rummaged in the straw, and to my
great satisfaction drew out a little packet of small

pieces of paper. When the hideous little dog
saw this, it first bit me in the calf of the leg, and
then, as soon as it had become aware of my theft,
it began to whimper and to fawn on me; but I
said, &ldquo;No, you little beast; good-bye!&rdquo; and
hastened away.</p>

<p>I believe the girl thought me mad; at any rate
she was thoroughly alarmed.</p>

<p>When I reached my room I wished to get to
work at once, and read through the letters by
daylight, since I do not see well by candle-light;
but the wretched Mawra had got the idea of
sweeping the floor. These blockheads of Finnish
women are always clean where there is no
need to be.</p>

<p>I then went for a little walk and began to think
over what had happened. Now at last I could
get to the bottom of all facts, ideas and motives!
These letters would explain everything. Dogs
are clever fellows; they know all about politics,
and I will certainly find in the letters all I want,
especially the character of the director and all
his relationships. And through these letters I
will get information about her who&mdash;but silence!</p>

<p>Towards evening I came home and lay for a
good while on the bed.</p>

<hr class="space-break"/>

<p><i>November 13th.</i>&mdash;Now let us see! The letter
is fairly legible but the handwriting is somewhat
doggish.</p>

<hr class="space-break"/>

<p>&ldquo;<span class="small-caps">Dear Fidel!</span>&mdash;I cannot get accustomed to
your ordinary name, as if they could not have
found a better one for you! Fidel! How tasteless!
How ordinary! But this is not the time
to discuss it. I am very glad that we thought of
corresponding with each other.&rdquo;</p>

<p>(The letter is quite correctly written. The
punctuation and spelling are perfectly right.
Even our head clerk does not write so simply
and clearly, though he declares he has been at
the University. Let us go on.)</p>

<p>&ldquo;I think that it is one of the most refined joys
of this world to interchange thoughts, feelings,
and impressions.&rdquo;</p>

<p>(H'm! This idea comes from some book
which has been translated from German. I
can't remember the title.)</p>

<p>&ldquo;I speak from experience, although I have
not gone farther into the world than just before
our front door. Does not my life pass happily
and comfortably? My mistress, whom her
father calls Sophie, is quite in love with me.&rdquo;</p>

<p>(Ah! Ah!&mdash;but better be silent!)</p>

<p>&ldquo;Her father also often strokes me. I drink
tea and coffee with cream. Yes, my dear, I must
confess to you that I find no satisfaction in those
large, gnawed-at bones which Polkan devours in
the kitchen. Only the bones of wild fowl are
good, and that only when the marrow has not
been sucked out of them. They taste very nice

with a little sauce, but there should be no green
stuff in it. But I know nothing worse than the
habit of giving dogs balls of bread kneaded up.
Someone sits at table, kneads a bread-ball with
dirty fingers, calls you and sticks it in your mouth.
Good manners forbid your refusing it, and you
eat it&mdash;with disgust it is true, but you eat it.&rdquo;</p>

<p>(The deuce! What is this? What rubbish!
As if she could find nothing more suitable to
write about! I will see if there is anything more
reasonable on the second page.)</p>

<p>&ldquo;I am quite willing to inform you of everything
that goes on here. I have already mentioned
the most important person in the house,
whom Sophie calls &lsquo;Papa.&rsquo; He is a very strange
man.&rdquo;</p>

<p>(Ah! Here we are at last! Yes, I knew it;
they have a politician's penetrating eye for all
things. Let us see what she says about &ldquo;Papa.&rdquo;)</p>

<p>&ldquo;&hellip;&nbsp;a strange man. Generally he is silent;
he only speaks seldom, but about a week ago he
kept on repeating to himself, &lsquo;Shall I get it or
not?&rsquo; In one hand he took a sheet of paper;
the other he stretched out as though to receive
something, and repeated, &lsquo;Shall I get it or not?&rsquo;
Once he turned to me with the question, &lsquo;What
do you think, Meggy?&rsquo; I did not understand in
the least what he meant, sniffed at his boots, and
went away. A week later he came home with
his face beaming. That morning he was visited

by several officers in uniform who congratulated
him. At the dinner-table he was in a better
humour than I have ever seen him before.&rdquo;</p>

<p>(Ah! he is ambitious then! I must make a
note of that.)</p>

<p>&ldquo;Pardon, my dear, I hasten to conclude, etc.,
etc. To-morrow I will finish the letter.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="dot-break">. . . . . .</p>

<p>&ldquo;Now, good morning; here I am again at
your service. To-day my mistress Sophie&nbsp;&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p>(Ah! we will see what she says about Sophie.
Let us go on!)</p>

<p>&ldquo;&hellip;&nbsp;was in an unusually excited state.
She went to a ball, and I was glad that I could
write to you in her absence. She likes going to
balls, although she gets dreadfully irritated while
dressing. I cannot understand, my dear, what
is the pleasure in going to a ball. She comes
home from the ball at six o'clock in the early
morning, and to judge by her pale and emaciated
face, she has had nothing to eat. I could,
frankly speaking, not endure such an existence.
If I could not get partridge with sauce, or the
wing of a roast chicken, I don't know what I
should do. Porridge with sauce is also tolerable,
but I can get up no enthusiasm for carrots,
turnips, and artichokes.&rdquo;</p>

<hr class="space-break"/>

<p>The style is very unequal! One sees at once
that it has not been written by a man. The

beginning is quite intelligent, but at the end the
canine nature breaks out. I will read another
letter; it is rather long and there is no date.</p>

<hr class="space-break"/>

<p>&ldquo;Ah, my dear, how delightful is the arrival of
spring! My heart beats as though it expected
something. There is a perpetual ringing in my
ears, so that I often stand with my foot raised,
for several minutes at a time, and listen towards
the door. In confidence I will tell you that I
have many admirers. I often sit on the window-sill
and let them pass in review. Ah! if you
knew what miscreations there are among them;
one, a clumsy house-dog, with stupidity written
on his face, walks the street with an important
air and imagines that he is an extremely important
person, and that the eyes of all the world
are fastened on him. I don't pay him the least
attention, and pretend not to see him at all.</p>

<p>&ldquo;And what a hideous bulldog has taken up
his post opposite my window! If he stood on
his hind-legs, as the monster probably cannot,
he would be taller by a head than my mistress's
papa, who himself has a stately figure. This lout
seems, moreover, to be very impudent. I growl
at him, but he does not seem to mind that at all.
If he at least would only wrinkle his forehead!
Instead of that, he stretches out his tongue,
droops his big ears, and stares in at the window&mdash;this
rustic boor! But do you think, my dear,

that my heart remains proof against all temptations?
Alas no! If you had only seen that
gentlemanly dog who crept through the fence
of the neighbouring house. &lsquo;Treasure&rsquo; is his
name. Ah, my dear, what a delightful snout he
has!&rdquo;</p>

<p>(To the deuce with the stuff! What rubbish
it is! How can one blacken paper with such
absurdities. Give me a man. I want to see a
man! I need some food to nourish and refresh
my mind, and get this silliness instead. I will
turn the page to see if there is anything better
on the other side.)</p>

<p>&ldquo;Sophie sat at the table and sewed something.
I looked out of the window and amused myself
by watching the passers-by. Suddenly a flunkey
entered and announced a visitor&mdash;&lsquo;Mr Teploff.&rsquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;&lsquo;Show him in!&rsquo; said Sophie, and began to
embrace me. &lsquo;Ah! Meggy, Meggy, do you
know who that is? He is dark, and belongs to
the Royal Household; and what eyes he has!
Dark and brilliant as fire.&rsquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Sophie hastened into her room. A minute
later a young gentleman with black whiskers
entered. He went to the mirror, smoothed his
hair, and looked round the room. I turned away
and sat down in my place.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Sophie entered and returned his bow in a
friendly manner.</p>

<p>&ldquo;I pretended to observe nothing, and continued

to look out of the window. But I leant
my head a little on one side to hear what they
were talking about. Ah, my dear! what silly
things they discussed&mdash;how a lady executed the
wrong figure in dancing; how a certain Boboff,
with his expansive shirt-frill, had looked like a
stork and nearly fallen down; how a certain
Lidina imagined she had blue eyes when they
were really green, etc.</p>

<p>&ldquo;I do not know, my dear, what special charm
she finds in her Mr Teploff, and why she is so
delighted with him.&rdquo;</p>

<p>(It seems to me myself that there is something
wrong here. It is impossible that this Teploff
should bewitch her. We will see further.)</p>

<p>&ldquo;If this gentleman of the Household pleases
her, then she must also be pleased, according to
my view, with that official who sits in her papa's
writing-room. Ah, my dear, if you know what
a figure he is! A regular tortoise!&rdquo;</p>

<p>(What official does she mean?)</p>

<p>&ldquo;He has an extraordinary name. He always
sits there and mends the pens. His hair looks
like a truss of hay. Her papa always employs
him instead of a servant.&rdquo;</p>

<p>(I believe this abominable little beast is referring
to me. But what has my hair got to do with
hay?)</p>

<p>&ldquo;Sophie can never keep from laughing when
she sees him.&rdquo;</p>

<hr class="space-break"/>

<p>You lie, cursed dog! What a scandalous
tongue! As if I did not know that it is envy
which prompts you, and that here there is
treachery at work&mdash;yes, the treachery of the
chief clerk. This man hates me implacably; he
has plotted against me, he is always seeking to
injure me. I'll look through one more letter;
perhaps it will make the matter clearer.</p>

<hr class="space-break"/>

<p>&ldquo;Fidel, my dear, pardon me that I have not
written for so long. I was floating in a dream
of delight. In truth, some author remarks,
&lsquo;Love is a second life.&rsquo; Besides, great changes
are going on in the house. The young chamberlain
is always here. Sophie is wildly in love with
him. Her papa is quite contented. I heard
from Gregor, who sweeps the floor, and is in
the habit of talking to himself, that the marriage
will soon be celebrated. Her papa will at any
rate get his daughter married to a general, a
colonel, or a chamberlain.&rdquo;</p>

<hr class="space-break"/>

<p>Deuce take it! I can read no more. It is
all about chamberlains and generals. I should
like myself to be a general&mdash;not in order to sue
for her hand and all that&mdash;no, not at all; I
should like to be a general merely in order to
see people wriggling, squirming, and hatching
plots before me.</p>

<p>And then I should like to tell them that they
are both of them not worth spitting on. But it is

vexatious! I tear the foolish dog's letters up in
a thousand pieces.</p>

<hr class="space-break"/>

<p><i>December 3rd.</i>&mdash;It is not possible that the
marriage should take place; it is only idle gossip.
What does it signify if he is a chamberlain!
That is only a dignity, not a substantial thing
which one can see or handle. His chamberlain's
office will not procure him a third eye in his
forehead. Neither is his nose made of gold; it
is just like mine or anyone else's nose. He does
not eat and cough, but smells and sneezes with
it. I should like to get to the bottom of the
mystery&mdash;whence do all these distinctions come?
Why am I only a titular councillor?</p>

<p>Perhaps I am really a count or a general, and
only appear to be a titular councillor. Perhaps
I don't even know who and what I am. How
many cases there are in history of a simple
gentleman, or even a burgher or peasant, suddenly
turning out to be a great lord or
baron? Well, suppose that I appear suddenly
in a general's uniform, on the right shoulder an
epaulette, on the left an epaulette, and a blue
sash across my breast, what sort of a tune would
my beloved sing then? What would her papa,
our director, say? Oh, he is ambitious! He is
a freemason, certainly a freemason; however
much he may conceal it, I have found it out.
When he gives anyone his hand, he only reaches

out two fingers. Well, could not I this minute
be nominated a general or a superintendent? I
should like to know why I am a titular councillor&mdash;why
just that, and nothing more?</p>

<hr class="space-break"/>

<p><i>December 5th.</i>&mdash;To-day I have been reading
papers the whole morning. Very strange things
are happening in Spain. I have not understood
them all. It is said that the throne is vacant,
the representatives of the people are in difficulties
about finding an occupant, and riots are
taking place.</p>

<p>All this appears to me very strange. How can
the throne be vacant? It is said that it will be
occupied by a woman. A woman cannot sit on
a throne. That is impossible. Only a king can
sit on a throne. They say that there is no king
there, but that is not possible. There cannot be
a kingdom without a king. There must be a
king, but he is hidden away somewhere. Perhaps
he is actually on the spot, and only some
domestic complications, or fears of the neighbouring
Powers, France and other countries,
compel him to remain in concealment; there
might also be other reasons.</p>

<hr class="space-break"/>

<p><i>December 8th.</i>&mdash;I was nearly going to the
office, but various considerations kept me from
doing so. I keep on thinking about these
Spanish affairs. How is it possible that a woman
should reign? It would not be allowed, especially

by England. In the rest of Europe the
political situation is also critical; the Emperor of
Austria<span style="white-space: nowrap;">&mdash;&mdash;</span></p>

<p>These events, to tell the truth, have so shaken
and shattered me, that I could really do nothing
all day. Mawra told me that I was very absent-minded
at table. In fact, in my absent-mindedness
I threw two plates on the ground so that
they broke in pieces.</p>

<p>After dinner I felt weak, and did not feel up
to making abstracts of reports. I lay most of
the time on my bed, and thought of the Spanish
affairs.</p>

<hr class="space-break"/>

<p><i>The year 2000: April 43rd.</i>&mdash;To-day is a day
of splendid triumph. Spain has a king; he has
been found, and I am he. I discovered it to-day;
all of a sudden it came upon me like a flash
of lightning.</p>

<p>I do not understand how I could imagine that
I am a titular councillor. How could such a
foolish idea enter my head? It was fortunate
that it occurred to no one to shut me up in an
asylum. Now it is all clear, and as plain as
a pikestaff. Formerly&mdash;I don't know why&mdash;everything
seemed veiled in a kind of mist.
That is, I believe, because people think that the
human brain is in the head. Nothing of the
sort; it is carried by the wind from the Caspian
Sea.</p>

<p>For the first time I told Mawra who I am.
When she learned that the king of Spain stood
before her, she struck her hands together
over her head, and nearly died of alarm. The
stupid thing had never seen the king of Spain
before!</p>

<p>I comforted her, however, at once by assuring
her that I was not angry with her for having
hitherto cleaned my boots badly. Women are
stupid things; one cannot interest them in
lofty subjects. She was frightened because she
thought all kings of Spain were like Philip&nbsp;II.
But I explained to her that there was a great
difference between me and him. I did not go
to the office. Why the deuce should I? No, my
dear friends, you won't get me there again! I
am not going to worry myself with your infernal
documents any more.</p>

<hr class="space-break"/>

<p><i>Marchember 86. Between day and night.</i>&mdash;To-day
the office-messenger came and summoned
me, as I had not been there for three weeks. I
went just for the fun of the thing. The chief
clerk thought I would bow humbly before him,
and make excuses; but I looked at him quite
indifferently, neither angrily nor mildly, and sat
down quietly at my place as though I noticed no
one. I looked at all this rabble of scribblers,
and thought, &ldquo;If you only knew who is sitting
among you! Good heavens! what a to-do you

would make. Even the chief clerk would bow
himself to the earth before me as he does now
before the director.&rdquo;</p>

<p>A pile of reports was laid before me, of which
to make abstracts, but I did not touch them with
one finger.</p>

<p>After a little time there was a commotion in
the office, and there a report went round that the
director was coming. Many of the clerks vied
with each other to attract his notice; but I did not
stir. As he came through our room, each one
hastily buttoned up his coat; but I had no idea
of doing anything of the sort. What is the
director to me? Should I stand up before him?
Never. What sort of a director is he? He is a
bottle-stopper, and no director. A quite ordinary,
simple bottle-stopper&mdash;nothing more. I
felt quite amused as they gave me a document
to sign.</p>

<p>They thought I would simply put down my
name&mdash;&ldquo;So-and-so, Clerk.&rdquo; Why not? But
at the top of the sheet, where the director generally
writes his name, I inscribed &ldquo;Ferdinand&nbsp;VIII.&rdquo;
in bold characters. You should have
seen what a reverential silence ensued. But
I made a gesture with my hand, and said,
&ldquo;Gentlemen, no ceremony please!&rdquo; Then I
went out, and took my way straight to the
director's house.</p>

<p>He was not at home. The flunkey wanted not

to let me in, but I talked to him in such a way
that he soon dropped his arms.</p>

<p>I went straight to Sophie's dressing-room.
She sat before the mirror. When she saw me,
she sprang up and took a step backwards; but I
did not tell her that I was the king of Spain.</p>

<p>But I told her that a happiness awaited her,
beyond her power to imagine; and that in spite
of all our enemies' devices we should be united.
That was all which I wished to say to her, and I
went out. Oh, what cunning creatures these
women are! Now I have found out what woman
really is. Hitherto no one knew whom a woman
really loves; I am the first to discover it&mdash;she
loves the devil. Yes, joking apart, learned men
write nonsense when they pronounce that she is
this and that; she loves the devil&mdash;that is all.
You see a woman looking through her lorgnette
from a box in the front row. One thinks she is
watching that stout gentleman who wears an
order. Not a bit of it! She is watching the
devil who stands behind his back. He has
hidden himself there, and beckons to her with
his finger. And she marries him&mdash;actually&mdash;she
marries him!</p>

<p>That is all ambition, and the reason is that
there is under the tongue a little blister in which
there is a little worm of the size of a pin's head.
And this is constructed by a barber in Bean
Street; I don't remember his name at the

moment, but so much is certain that, in conjunction
with a midwife, he wants to spread
Mohammedanism all over the world, and that in
consequence of this a large number of people in
France have already adopted the faith of Islam.</p>

<hr class="space-break"/>

<p><i>No date. The day had no date.</i>&mdash;I went for
a walk incognito on the Nevski Prospect. I
avoided every appearance of being the king of
Spain. I felt it below my dignity to let myself
be recognised by the whole world, since I must
first present myself at court. And I was also
restrained by the fact that I have at present no
Spanish national costume. If I could only get
a cloak! I tried to have a consultation with a
tailor, but these people are real asses! Moreover,
they neglect their business, dabble in
speculation, and have become loafers. I will
have a cloak made out of my new official uniform
which I have only worn twice. But to prevent
this botcher of a tailor spoiling it, I will make it
myself with closed doors, so that no one sees
me. Since the cut must be altogether altered,
I have used the scissors myself.</p>

<hr class="space-break"/>

<p>I don't remember the date. The devil knows
what month it was. The cloak is quite ready.
Mawra exclaimed aloud when I put it on. I
will, however, not present myself at court yet;
the Spanish deputation has not yet arrived. It
would not be befitting if I appeared without

them. My appearance would be less imposing.
From hour to hour I expect them.</p>

<hr class="space-break"/>

<p><i>The 1st.</i>&mdash;The extraordinary long delay of the
deputies in coming astonishes me. What can
possibly keep them? Perhaps France has a hand
in the matter; it is certainly hostilely inclined.
I went to the post office to inquire whether the
Spanish deputation had come. The postmaster
is an extraordinary blockhead who knows
nothing. &ldquo;No,&rdquo; he said to me, &ldquo;there is no
Spanish deputation here; but if you want to send
them a letter, we will forward it at the fixed
rate.&rdquo; The deuce! What do I want with a
letter? Letters are nonsense. Letters are
written by apothecaries&hellip;.</p>

<hr class="space-break"/>

<p><i>Madrid, February 30th.</i>&mdash;So I am in Spain
after all! It has happened so quickly that I
could hardly take it in. The Spanish deputies
came early this morning, and I got with them
into the carriage. This unexpected promptness
seemed to me strange. We drove so quickly
that in half an hour we were at the Spanish
frontier. Over all Europe now there are cast-iron
roads, and the steamers go very fast. A
wonderful country, this Spain!</p>

<p>As we entered the first room, I saw numerous
persons with shorn heads. I guessed at once
that they must be either grandees or soldiers, at
least to judge by their shorn heads.</p>

<p>The Chancellor of the State, who led me by
the hand, seemed to me to behave in a very
strange way; he pushed me into a little room
and said, &ldquo;Stay here, and if you call yourself
&lsquo;King Ferdinand&rsquo; again, I will drive the wish
to do so out of you.&rdquo;</p>

<p>I knew, however, that that was only a test,
and I reasserted my conviction; on which the
Chancellor gave me two such severe blows with
a stick on the back, that I could have cried out
with the pain. But I restrained myself, remembering
that this was a usual ceremony of old-time
chivalry when one was inducted into a high
position, and in Spain the laws of chivalry
prevail up to the present day. When I was
alone, I determined to study State affairs; I
discovered that Spain and China are one and the
same country, and it is only through ignorance
that people regard them as separate kingdoms.
I <ins title="advice">advise</ins> everyone urgently to write down the
word &ldquo;Spain&rdquo; on a sheet of paper; he will see
that it is quite the same as China.</p>

<p>But I feel much annoyed by an event which is
about to take place to-morrow; at seven o'clock
the earth is going to sit on the moon. This is
foretold by the famous English chemist, Wellington.
To tell the truth, I often felt uneasy
when I thought of the excessive brittleness and
fragility of the moon. The moon is generally
repaired in Hamburg, and very imperfectly. It

is done by a lame cooper, an obvious blockhead
who has no idea how to do it. He took waxed
thread and olive-oil&mdash;hence that pungent smell
over all the earth which compels people to hold
their noses. And this makes the moon so fragile
that no men can live on it, but only noses.
Therefore we cannot see our noses, because they
are on the moon.</p>

<p>When I now pictured to myself how the earth,
that massive body, would crush our noses to
dust, if it sat on the moon, I became so uneasy,
that I immediately put on my shoes and stockings
and hastened into the council-hall to give
the police orders to prevent the <ins title="moon">earth</ins> sitting on
the <ins title="earth">moon</ins>.</p>

<p>The grandees with the shorn heads, whom
I met in great numbers in the hall, were
very intelligent people, and when I exclaimed,
&ldquo;Gentlemen! let us save the moon, for the earth
is going to sit on it,&rdquo; they all set to work to fulfil
my imperial wish, and many of them clambered
up the wall in order to take the moon down.
At that moment the Imperial Chancellor came in.
As soon as he appeared, they all scattered, but I
alone, as king, remained. To my astonishment,
however, the Chancellor beat me with the stick
and drove me to my room. So powerful are
ancient customs in Spain!</p>

<hr class="space-break"/>

<p><i>January in the same year, following after

February.</i>&mdash;I can never understand what kind
of a country this Spain really is. The popular
customs and rules of court etiquette are quite
extraordinary. I do not understand them at all,
at all. To-day my head was shorn, although I
exclaimed as loudly as I could, that I did
not want to be a monk. What happened afterwards,
when they began to let cold water trickle
on my head, I do not know. I have never
experienced such hellish torments. I nearly
went mad, and they had difficulty in holding me.
The significance of this strange custom is entirely
hidden from me. It is a very foolish and unreasonable
one.</p>

<p>Nor can I understand the stupidity of the kings
who have not done away with it before now.
Judging by all the circumstances, it seems to me
as though I had fallen into the hands of the
Inquisition, and as though the man whom I took
to be the Chancellor was the Grand Inquisitor.
But yet I cannot understand how the king could
fall into the hands of the Inquisition. The affair
may have been arranged by France&mdash;especially
Polignac&mdash;he is a hound, that Polignac! He
has sworn to compass my death, and now he is
hunting me down. But I know, my friend, that
you are only a tool of the English. They are
clever fellows, and have a finger in every pie.
All the world knows that France sneezes when
England takes a pinch of snuff.</p>

<hr class="space-break"/>

<p><i>The 25th.</i>&mdash;To-day the Grand Inquisitor came
into my room; when I heard his steps in the
distance, I hid myself under a chair. When
he did not see me, he began to call. At first he
called &ldquo;Poprishchin!&rdquo; I made no answer.
Then he called &ldquo;Axanti Ivanovitch! Titular
Councillor! Nobleman!&rdquo; I still kept silence.
&ldquo;Ferdinand the Eighth, King of Spain!&rdquo; I
was on the point of putting out my head, but I
thought, &ldquo;No, brother, you shall not deceive
me! You shall not pour water on my head
again!&rdquo;</p>

<p>But he had already seen me and drove me from
under the chair with his stick. The cursed stick
really hurts one. But the following discovery
compensated me for all the pain, i.e. that every
cock has his Spain under his feathers. The
Grand Inquisitor went angrily away, and threatened
me with some punishment or other. I felt
only contempt for his powerless spite, for I know
that he only works like a machine, like a tool of
the English.</p>

<hr class="space-break"/>

<p><i>34 March. February, 349.</i>&mdash;No, I have no
longer power to endure. O God! what are they
going to do with me? They pour cold water on
my head. They take no notice of me, and seem
neither to see nor hear. Why do they torture
me? What do they want from one so wretched
as myself? What can I give them? I possess

nothing. I cannot bear all their tortures; my
head aches as though everything were turning
round in a circle. Save me! Carry me away!
Give me three steeds swift as the wind! Mount
your seat, coachman, ring bells, gallop horses,
and carry me straight out of this world. Farther,
ever farther, till nothing more is to be seen!</p>

<p>Ah! the heaven bends over me already; a star
glimmers in the distance; the forest with its dark
trees in the moonlight rushes past; a bluish mist
floats under my feet; music sounds in the cloud;
on the one side is the sea, on the other, Italy;
beyond I also see Russian peasants' houses. Is
not my parents' house there in the distance?
Does not my mother sit by the window? O
mother, mother, save your unhappy son! Let a
tear fall on his aching head! See how they
torture him! Press the poor orphan to your
bosom! He has no rest in this world; they hunt
him from place to place.</p>

<p>Mother, mother, have pity on your sick child!
And do you know that the Bey of Algiers has a
wart under his nose?</p>

<h2>A MAY NIGHT</h2>

<h3>I</h3>

<p class="no-indent"><span class="small-caps">Songs</span> were echoing in the village street. It
was just the time when the young men and girls,
tired with the work and cares of the day, were
in the habit of assembling for the dance. In the
mild evening light, cheerful songs blended with
mild melodies. A mysterious twilight obscured
the blue sky and made everything seem indistinct
and distant. It was growing dark, but the
songs were not hushed.</p>

<p>A young Cossack, Levko by name, the son of
the village headman, had stolen away from the
singers, guitar in hand. With his embroidered
cap set awry on his head, and his hand playing
over the strings, he stepped a measure to the
music. Then he stopped at the door of a house
half hidden by blossoming cherry-trees. Whose
house was it? To whom did the door lead?
After a little while he played and sang:</p>

<div class="poetry width18">
<div class="stanza">
<div class="line">&ldquo;The night is nigh, the sun is down,<br/></div>
<div class="line indent1">Come out to me, my love, my own!&rdquo;<br/></div>
</div>
</div>

<p>&ldquo;No one is there; my bright-eyed beauty is
fast asleep,&rdquo; said the Cossack to himself as he
finished the song and approached the window.
&ldquo;Hanna, Hanna, are you asleep, or won't you
come to me? Perhaps you are afraid someone
will see us, or will not expose your delicate face
to the cold! Fear nothing! The evening is
warm, and there is no one near. And if anyone
comes I will wrap you in my caftan, fold you in
my arms, and no one will see us. And if the wind
blows cold, I will press you close to my heart,
warm you with my kisses, and lay my cap on your
tiny feet, my darling. Only throw me a single
glance. No, you are not asleep, you proud
thing!&rdquo; he exclaimed now louder, in a voice
which betrayed his annoyance at the humiliation.
&ldquo;You are laughing at me! Good-bye!&rdquo;</p>

<p>Then he turned away, set his cap jauntily, and,
still lightly touching his guitar, stepped back
from the window. Just then the wooden handle
of the door turned with a grating noise, and a girl
who counted hardly seventeen springs looked
out timidly through the darkness, and still keeping
hold of the handle, stepped over the threshold.
In the twilight her bright eyes shone like
little stars, her coral necklace gleamed, and the
pink flush on her cheeks did not escape the
Cossack's observation.</p>

<p>&ldquo;How impatient you are!&rdquo; she said in a
whisper. &ldquo;You get angry so quickly! Why

did you choose such a time? There are crowds
of people in the street&hellip;. I tremble all over.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Don't tremble, my darling! Come close
to me!&rdquo; said the Cossack, putting down his
guitar, which hung on a long strap round his
neck, and sitting down with her on the door-step.
&ldquo;You know I find it hard to be only an
hour without seeing you.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Do you know what I am thinking of?&rdquo;
interrupted the young girl, looking at him
thoughtfully. &ldquo;Something whispers to me that
we shall not see so much of each other in the
future. The people here are not well disposed
to you, the girls look so envious, and the young
fellows&hellip;. I notice also that my mother
watches me carefully for some time past. I
must confess I was happier when among
strangers.&rdquo; Her face wore a troubled expression
as she spoke.</p>

<p>&ldquo;You are only two months back at home,
and are already tired of it!&rdquo; said the Cossack.
&ldquo;And of me too perhaps?&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Oh no!&rdquo; she replied, smiling. &ldquo;I love
you, you black-eyed Cossack! I love you because
of your dark eyes, and my heart laughs
in my breast when you look at me. I feel so
happy when you come down the street stroking
your black moustache, and enjoy listening to
your song when you play the guitar!&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Oh my Hanna!&rdquo; exclaimed the Cossack,

kissing the girl and drawing her closer to
him.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Stop, Levko! Tell me whether you have
spoken to your father?&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;About what?&rdquo; he answered absent-mindedly.
&ldquo;About my marrying you? Yes,
I did.&rdquo; But he seemed to speak almost
reluctantly.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Well? What more?&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;What can you make of him? The old
curmudgeon pretends to be deaf; he will not
listen to anything, and blames me for loafing with
fellows, as he says, about the streets. But don't
worry, Hanna! I give you my word as a
Cossack, I will break his obstinacy.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;You only need to say a word, Levko, and it
shall be as you wish. I know that of myself.
Often I do not wish to obey you, but you speak
only a word, and I involuntarily do what you
wish. Look, look!&rdquo; she continued, laying her
head on his shoulder and raising her eyes to the
sky, the immeasurable heaven of the Ukraine;
&ldquo;there far away are twinkling little stars&mdash;one,
two, three, four, five. Is it not true that those
are angels opening the windows of their bright
little homes and looking down on us. Is it not
so, Levko? They are looking down on earth. If
men had wings like birds, how high they could
fly. But ah! not even our oaks reach the sky.
Still people say there is in some distant land a

tree whose top reaches to heaven, and that God
descends by it on the earth, the night before
Easter.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;No, Hanna. God has a long ladder which
reaches from heaven to earth. Before Easter
Sunday holy angels set it up, and as soon as God
puts His foot on the first rung, all evil spirits
take to flight and fall in swarms into hell. That
is why on Easter Day there are none of them on
earth.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;How gently the water ripples! Like a child
in the cradle,&rdquo; continued Hanna, pointing to the
pool begirt by dark maples and weeping-willows,
whose melancholy branches drooped in the
water. On a hill near the wood slumbered an
old house with closed shutters. The roof was
covered with moss and weeds; leafy apple-trees
had grown high up before the windows; the wood
cast deep shadows on it; a grove of nut-trees
spread from the foot of the hill as far as the pool.</p>

<p>&ldquo;I remember as if in a dream,&rdquo; said Hanna,
keeping her eyes fixed on the house, &ldquo;a long,
long time ago, when I was little and lived with
mother, someone told a terrible story about this
house. You must know it&mdash;tell me.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;God forbid, my dear child! Old women
and stupid people talk a lot of nonsense. It
would only frighten you and spoil your sleep.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Tell me, my darling, my black-eyed
Cossack,&rdquo; she said, pressing her cheek to his.

&ldquo;No, you don't love me; you have certainly
another sweetheart! I will not be frightened,
and will sleep quite quietly. If you refuse to tell
me, <em>that</em> would keep me awake. I would keep
on worrying and thinking about it. Tell me,
Levko!&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Certainly it is true what people say, that the
devil possesses girls, and stirs up their curiosity.
Well then, listen. Long ago there lived in
that house an elderly man who had a beautiful
daughter white as snow, just like you. His wife
had been dead a long time, and he was thinking
of marrying again.</p>

<p>&ldquo;&lsquo;Will you pet me as before, father, if you
take a second wife?&rsquo; asked his daughter.</p>

<p>&ldquo;&lsquo;Yes, my daughter,&rsquo; he answered, &lsquo;I shall
love you more than ever, and give you yet more
rings and necklaces.&rsquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;So he brought a young wife home, who was
beautiful and white and red, but she cast such
an evil glance at her stepdaughter that she cried
aloud, but not a word did her sulky stepmother
speak to her all day long.</p>

<p>&ldquo;When night came, and her father and his
wife had retired, the young girl locked herself up
in her room, and feeling melancholy began to
weep bitterly. Suddenly she spied a hideous
black cat creeping towards her; its fur was aflame
and its claws struck on the ground like iron. In
her terror the girl sprang on a chair; the cat

followed her. Then she sprang into bed; the
cat sprang after her, and seizing her by
the throat began to choke her. She tore the
creature away, and flung it on the ground, but
the terrible cat began to creep towards her again.
Rendered desperate with terror, she seized her
father's sabre which hung on the wall, and struck
at the cat, wounding one of its paws. The
animal disappeared, whimpering.</p>

<p>&ldquo;The next day the young wife did not leave
her bedroom; the third day she appeared with
her hand bound up.</p>

<p>&ldquo;The poor girl perceived that her stepmother
was a witch, and that she had wounded her
hand.</p>

<p>&ldquo;On the fourth day her father told her to
bring water, to sweep the floor like a servant-maid,
and not to show herself where he and his
wife sat. She obeyed him, though with a heavy
heart. On the fifth day he drove her barefooted
out of the house, without giving her any food
for her journey. Then she began to sob and
covered her face with her hands.</p>

<p>&ldquo;&lsquo;You have ruined your own daughter,
father!&rsquo; she cried; &lsquo;and the witch has ruined
your soul. May God forgive you! He will not
allow me to live much longer.&rsquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;And do you see,&rdquo; continued Levko, turning
to Hanna and pointing to the house, &ldquo;do you
see that high bank; from that bank she threw

herself into the water, and has been no more
seen on earth.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;And the witch?&rdquo; Hanna interrupted,
timidly fastening her tearful eyes on him.</p>

<p>&ldquo;The witch? Old women say that when the
moon shines, all those who have been drowned
come out to warm themselves in its rays, and
that they are led by the witch's stepdaughter.
One night she saw her stepmother by the pool,
caught hold of her, and dragged her screaming
into the water. But this time also the witch
played her a trick; she changed herself into one
of those who had been drowned, <ins title="anl">and</ins> so escaped
the chastisement she would have received at
their hands.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Let anyone who likes believe the old
women's stories. They say that the witch's
stepdaughter gathers together those who have
been drowned every night, and looks in their
faces in order to find out which of them is the
witch; but has not done so yet. Such are the
old wives' tales. It is said to be the intention
of the present owner to erect a distillery on the
spot. But I hear voices. They are coming
home from the dancing. Good-bye, Hanna!
Sleep well, and don't think of all that nonsense.&rdquo;
So saying he embraced her, kissed her, and
departed.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Good-bye, Levko!&rdquo; said Hanna, still gazing
at the dark pine wood.</p>

<p>The brilliant moon was now rising and filling
all the earth with splendour. The pool shone
like silver, and the shadows of the trees stood
out in strong relief.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Good-bye, Hanna!&rdquo; she heard again as she
spoke, and felt the light pressure of a kiss.</p>

<p>&ldquo;You have come back!&rdquo; she said, looking
round, but started on seeing a stranger before
her.</p>

<p>There was another &ldquo;Good-bye, Hanna!&rdquo;
and again she was kissed.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Has the devil brought a second?&rdquo; she
exclaimed angrily.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Good-bye, dear Hanna!&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;There is a third!&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Good-bye, good-bye, good-bye, Hanna!&rdquo;
and kisses rained from all sides.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Why, there is a whole band of them!&rdquo; cried
Hanna, tearing herself from the youths who had
gathered round. &ldquo;Are they never tired of the
eternal kissing? I shall soon not be able to show
myself on the street!&rdquo; So saying, she closed
the door and bolted it.</p>

<h3>II<br/>
<small>THE VILLAGE HEADMAN</small></h3>

<p>Do you know a Ukraine night? No, you do not
know a night in the Ukraine. Gaze your full
on it. The moon shines in the midst of the sky;
the immeasurable vault of heaven seems to have

expanded to infinity; the earth is bathed in silver
light; the air is warm, voluptuous, and redolent
of innumerable sweet scents. Divine night!
Magical night! Motionless, but inspired with
divine breath, the forests stand, casting enormous
shadows and wrapped in complete darkness.
Calmly and placidly sleep the lakes surrounded
by dark green thickets. The virginal groves of
the hawthorns and cherry-trees stretch their
roots timidly into the cool water; only now and
then their leaves rustle unwillingly when that
freebooter, the night-wind, steals up to kiss them.
The whole landscape is hushed in slumber;
but there is a mysterious breath upon the
heights. One falls into a weird and unearthly
mood, and silvery apparitions rise from the
depths. Divine night! Magical night! Suddenly
the woods, lakes, and steppes become
alive. The nightingales of the Ukraine are singing,
and it seems as though the moon itself were
listening to their song. The village sleeps as
though under a magic spell; the cottages shine
in the moonlight against the darkness of the
woods behind them. The songs grow silent,
and all is still. Only here and there is a glimmer
of light in some small window. Some families,
sitting up late, are finishing their supper at the
thresholds of their houses.</p>

<p>&ldquo;No, the &lsquo;gallop&rsquo; is not danced like that!
Now I see, it does not go properly! What did

my godfather tell me? So then! Hop! tralala!
Hop! tralala! Hop! Hop! Hop!&rdquo; Thus
a half-intoxicated, middle-aged Cossack talked
to himself as he danced through the street.
&ldquo;By heaven, a &lsquo;gallop&rsquo; is not danced like that!
What is the use of lying! On with it then!
Hop! tralala! Hop! tralala! Hop! Hop!
Hop!&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;See that fool there! If he were only a
young fellow! But to see a grown man dancing,
and the children laughing at him,&rdquo; exclaimed an
old woman who was passing by, carrying a
bundle of straw. &ldquo;Go home! It is quite time
to go to sleep!&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;I am going!&rdquo; said the Cossack, standing
still. &ldquo;I am going. What do I care about the
headman? He thinks because he is the eldest,
and throws cold water on people, and carries his
head high. As to being headman&mdash;I myself am
a headman. Yes indeed&mdash;otherwise<span style="white-space: nowrap;">&mdash;&mdash;</span>&rdquo; As
he spoke, he stepped up to the door of the first
cottage he came to, stood at the window, drumming
with his fingers on the glass, and feeling
for the door-handle. &ldquo;Woman, open! Woman,
open quickly I tell you! It is time for me to go
to sleep!&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Where are you going, Kalenik? That is
the wrong house!&rdquo; some young girls who were
returning from the dance called to him as they
passed. &ldquo;Shall we show you yours?&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Yes, please, ladies!&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Ladies! Just listen to him!&rdquo; one of them
exclaimed. &ldquo;How polite Kalenik is! We will
show you the house&mdash;but no, first dance before
us!&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Dance before you? Oh, you are clever
girls!&rdquo; said Kalenik in a drawling voice, and
laughing. He threatened them with his finger,
and stumbled, not being able to stand steadily.
&ldquo;And will you let yourselves be kissed? I will
kiss the lot.&rdquo; With tottering steps he began to
run after them.</p>

<p>The girls cried out and ran apart; but they
soon plucked up courage and went on the other
side of the road, when they saw that Kalenik
was not firm on his legs.</p>

<p>&ldquo;There is your house!&rdquo; they called to him,
pointing to one which was larger than the rest,
and which belonged to the village headman.</p>

<p>Kalenik turned towards it, and began again
to revile the headman.</p>

<p>But who is this headman to whose disadvantage
so much has been said? Oh, he is a very
important person in the village. Before Kalenik
reaches his house, we shall doubtless find enough
time to say something about him. Everyone in
the village takes off his cap at the sight of him,
and even the smallest girls wish him good
morning. Which of the young Cossacks would
not like to be a headman? The headman has

an entry everywhere, and every stalwart rustic
stands respectfully, cap in hand, so long as the
headman feels round his snuff-box with his thick,
coarse finger. In parish-meetings and other
assemblies, although his power may be limited
by the votes of the majority, the headman still
maintains the upper hand, and sends whom
he chooses to make roads or dig ditches. In
outward manners he is morose and severe, and
not fond of talking. Long ago, when the
Empress Catherine of blessed memory journeyed
to the Crimea, he was chosen as one of her
escort for two whole days, and had the high
honour of sitting with the imperial coachman on
the box.</p>

<p>Since then the headman has formed the habit
of shaking his head solemnly and thoughtfully,
of stroking his long, drooping moustache, and of
darting hawk-like glances from his eyes. Whatever
the topic of conversation may be, he
manages to refer to his having accompanied the
Empress, and sat on the box of the imperial
coach. He often pretends to be hard of hearing,
especially when he hears something that he does
not like. He has an aversion for dandies, and
himself wears under a black caftan of cloth, made
at home, a simple, embroidered, woollen waist-band.
No one has seen him wear any other
dress except, of course, on the occasion of the
Czarina's journey to the Crimea, when he wore a

blue Cossack's uniform. Hardly anyone in the
village remembers that time, and he keeps the
uniform packed up in a chest.</p>

<p>The headman is a widower, but his sister-in-law
lives with him. She cooks his dinner and
supper, keeps the house and furniture clean,
weaves linen, and acts as housekeeper generally.
The village gossips say that she is not a relation
of his; but we must remark that the headman has
many enemies who spread all kinds of slanders
about him. We have now said what we considered
to be necessary about the headman, and
the drunken Kalenik is not yet half-way to his
house. He continued to abuse the headman in
terms which might be expected from one in his
condition.</p>

<h3>III<br/>
<small>AN UNEXPECTED RIVAL&mdash;THE CONSPIRACY</small></h3>

<p>&ldquo;No, you fellows, I won't. What is the
good of all those silly goings-on? Aren't you
tired of these foolish jokes? People already call
us good-for-nothing scapegraces. Better go to
bed!&rdquo; So Levko said one evening to his companions,
who were trying to persuade him to
take part with them in further practical jokes.
&ldquo;Farewell, brothers! Good night!&rdquo; he said,
and left them with quick steps.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Does my bright-eyed Hanna sleep?&rdquo; he

thought as he passed the house shaded by the
cherry-trees. Then in the silence he heard
the sound of a whispered conversation. Levko
stood still. Between the trees there glimmered
something white. &ldquo;What is that?&rdquo; he thought,
as he crept closer and hid himself behind a tree.</p>

<p>By the light of the moon he saw the face of a
girl standing opposite him. It was Hanna. But
who was the tall man who had his back turned to
him? In vain he strained his eyes; the whole
figure was hidden in shadow, and the slightest
forward step on Levko's part would expose him
to the risk of discovery. He therefore leant
quietly against the tree, and determined to
remain where he was. Then he heard the girl
utter his name distinctly.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Levko? Levko is a baby,&rdquo; said the tall man
in an undertone. &ldquo;If I ever find him with you,
I will pull his hair.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;I should like to know what rascal is boasting
of pulling my hair,&rdquo; said Levko to himself,
stretching out his head and endeavouring to miss
no word. But the stranger continued to speak
so low that he was inaudible.</p>

<p>&ldquo;What, aren't you ashamed?&rdquo; said Hanna
after he had finished. &ldquo;You are lying and
deceiving me; I will never believe that you love
me.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;I know,&rdquo; continued the tall man, &ldquo;that
Levko has talked nonsense to you and turned

your head.&rdquo; (Here it seemed to the Cossack
as though the stranger's voice were not quite
unknown to him, and that he must have heard it
somewhere or other.) &ldquo;But Levko shall learn to
know me,&rdquo; continued the stranger. &ldquo;He thinks
I don't notice his rascally tricks; but he will yet
feel the weight of my fists, the scoundrel!&rdquo;</p>

<p>At these words Levko could no longer restrain
his wrath. He came three steps nearer, and
took a run in order to plant a blow which would
have stretched the stranger on the ground in
spite of his strength. At that moment, however,
a ray of light fell on the latter's face, and Levko
stood transfixed, for he saw it was his father.
But he only expressed his surprise by an involuntary
shake of the head and a low whistle.</p>

<p>On the other side there was the sound of
approaching footsteps. Hanna ran hastily into
the house and closed the door behind her.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Good-bye, Hanna!&rdquo; cried one of the youths,
who had stolen up and embraced the headman,
but started back alarmed when he felt a rough
moustache.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Good-bye, my darling!&rdquo; cried another, but
speedily executed a somersault in consequence
of a violent blow from the headman.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Good-bye, good-bye, Hanna!&rdquo; exclaimed
several youths, falling on his neck.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Go to the deuce, you infernal scoundrels!&rdquo;
shouted the headman, defending himself with

both hands and feet. &ldquo;What kind of Hanna do
you take me for? Hang yourselves like your
fathers did, you children of the devil! Falling
on one like flies on honey! I will show you who
Hanna is!&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;The headman! The headman! It is the
headman!&rdquo; cried the youths, running away in
all directions.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Aha, father!&rdquo; said Levko to himself,
recovering from his astonishment and looking
after the headman as he departed, cursing and
scolding. &ldquo;Those are the tricks you like to
play! Splendid! And I wonder and puzzle my
head why he pretends to be deaf when I only
touch on the matter! Wait, you old sinner, I
will teach you to cajole other people's sweethearts.
Hi! you fellows, come here!&rdquo; he cried,
beckoning to the youths, who gathered round
him. &ldquo;Come nearer! I told you to go to bed,
but I am differently minded now, and am ready
to go round with you all night.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;That is reasonable,&rdquo; exclaimed a broad-shouldered,
stout fellow, who was regarded as
the chief toper and good-for-nothing in the
village. &ldquo;I always feel uncomfortable if I do
not have a good fling, and play some practical
jokes. I always feel as though there were something
wanting, as though I had lost my cap or my
pipe&mdash;in a word, I don't feel like a proper
Cossack then!&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Do you really want to bait the headman?&rdquo;
asked Levko.</p>

<p>&ldquo;The headman?&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Yes, the headman. I don't know for whom
he takes himself. He carries on as though he
were a duke. It is not only that he treats us as
if we were his serfs, but he comes after our
girls.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Quite right! That is true!&rdquo; exclaimed all
the youths together.</p>

<p>&ldquo;But are we made of any worse stuff than he?
We are, thank God! free Cossacks. Let us show
him so.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Yes, we will show him!&rdquo; they shouted.
&ldquo;But when we go for the headman, we must not
forget his clerk.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;The clerk shall have his share, too. Just
now a song that suits the headman occurs to me.
Go on! I will teach it you!&rdquo; continued Levko,
striking the strings of his guitar. &ldquo;But listen!
Disguise yourselves as well as you can.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Hurrah for the Cossacks!&rdquo; cried the stout
reveller, dancing and clapping his hands.
&ldquo;Long live freedom! When one lets the reins
go, one thinks of the good old times. It
feels as jolly as though one were in paradise.
Hurrah, you fellows! Go ahead!&rdquo;</p>

<p>The youths rushed noisily through the village
street, and the pious old women, aroused from
their sleep, looked through the windows, crossed

themselves drowsily, and thought, &ldquo;There they
go, the wild young fellows!&rdquo;</p>

<h3>IV<br/>
<small>WILD PRANKS</small></h3>

<p>Only in one house at the end of the street there
still burned a light; it was the headman's. He
had long finished his supper, and would certainly
have gone to sleep but that he had a guest
with him, the brandy-distiller. The latter had
been sent to superintend the building of a distillery
for the lords of the manor, who possessed
small allotments between the lands of the free
Cossacks. At the upper end of the table, in the
place of honour, sat the guest&mdash;a short, stout
man with small, merry eyes. He smoked his
short pipe with obvious satisfaction, spitting
every moment and constantly pushing the
tobacco down in the bowl. The clouds of smoke
collected over his head, and veiled him in a bluish
mist. It seemed as though the broad chimney
of a distillery, which was bored at always being
perched up on the roof, had hit upon the idea of
taking a little recreation, and had now settled
itself comfortably at the headman's table. Close
under his nose bristled his short, thick moustache,
which in the dim, smoky atmosphere
resembled a mouse which the distiller had caught

and held in his mouth, usurping the functions of
a dining-room cat. The headman sat there, as
master of the house, wearing only his shirt and
linen breeches. His eagle eye began to grow
dim like the setting sun, and to half close. At
the lower end of the table sat, smoking his pipe,
one of the village council, of which the headman
was superintendent. Out of respect for the
latter he had not removed his caftan.</p>

<p>&ldquo;How soon do you think,&rdquo; asked the headman,
turning to the distiller and putting his hand
before his gaping mouth, &ldquo;will you have the
distillery put up?&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;With God's help we shall be distilling brandy
this autumn. On Conception Day I bet the
headman will be tracing the figure eight with his
feet on his way home.&rdquo; So saying, the distiller
laughed so heartily that his small eyes
disappeared altogether, his body was convulsed,
and his twitching lips actually let go of the
reeking pipe for a moment.</p>

<p>&ldquo;God grant it!&rdquo; said the headman, on whose
face the shadow of a smile was visible. &ldquo;Now,
thank heaven, the number of distilleries is increasing
a little; but in the old days, when I
accompanied the Czarina on the Perejlaslov
Road, and the late Besborodko<span style="white-space: nowrap;">&mdash;&mdash;</span>&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Yes, my friend, those were bad times.
Then from Krementchuk to Romen there were
hardly two distilleries. And now&mdash;but have you

heard what the infernal Germans have invented?
They say they will no longer use wood for fuel in
the distilleries, but devilish steam.&rdquo; At these
words the distiller stared at the table reflectively,
and at his arms resting on it. &ldquo;But how they
can use steam&mdash;by heavens! I don't know.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;What fools these Germans are!&rdquo; said the
headman. &ldquo;I should like to give these sons
of dogs a good thrashing. Whoever heard of
cooking with steam? At this rate one will not
be able to get a spoonful of porridge or a bit of
bacon into one's mouth.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;And you, friend,&rdquo; broke in the headman's
sister-in-law, who was sitting by the stove; &ldquo;will
you be with us the whole time without your
wife?&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Do I want her then? If she were only
passably good-looking<span style="white-space: nowrap;">&mdash;&mdash;</span>&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;She is not pretty, then?&rdquo; asked the headman
with a questioning glance.</p>

<p>&ldquo;How should she be; as old as Satan, and with
a face as full of wrinkles as an empty purse,&rdquo;
said the distiller, shaking again with laughter.</p>

<p>Then a noise was heard at the door, which
opened and a Cossack stepped over the threshold
without removing his cap, and remained standing
in an absent-minded way in the middle of the
room, with open mouth and gazing at the ceiling.
It was Kalenik, whose acquaintance we have
already made.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Now I am at home,&rdquo; he said, taking his
seat by the door, without taking any notice of
those present. &ldquo;Ah! to what a length Satan
made the road stretch. I went on and on, and
there was no end. My legs are quite broken.
Woman, bring me my fur blanket to lie down on.
There it is in the corner; but mind you don't
upset the little pot of snuff. But no; better not
touch it! Leave it alone! You are really quite
drunk&mdash;I had better get it myself.&rdquo;</p>

<p>Kalenik tried to rise, but an invincible power
fettered him to his seat.</p>

<p>&ldquo;That's a nice business!&rdquo; said the headman.
&ldquo;He comes into a strange house, and behaves
as though he were at home! Push him out, in
heaven's name!&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Let him rest a bit, friend!&rdquo; said the
distiller, seizing the headman's arm. &ldquo;The
man is very useful; if we had only plenty of this
kind, our distillery would get on grandly&hellip;.&rdquo;
For the rest, it was not good-nature which
inspired these words. The distiller was full of
superstition, and to turn out a man who had
already sat down, seemed to him to be tantamount
to invoking the devil.</p>

<p>&ldquo;That comes of being old,&rdquo; grumbled
Kalenik, stretching himself out along the seat.
&ldquo;People might say I was drunk, but no, I am
not! Why should I lie? I am ready to tell the
headman to his face! Who is the headman

anyway? May he break his neck, the son of a
dog! I spit at him! May he be run over by a
cart, the one-eyed devil!&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Ah! the drunken sot has crawled into the
house, and now he lays his paws on the table,&rdquo;
said the headman, rising angrily; but at that
moment a heavy stone, breaking a window-pane
to pieces, fell at his feet. The headman remained
standing. &ldquo;If I knew,&rdquo; he said, &ldquo;what
jail-bird has thrown it, I would give him something.
What devil's trick is this?&rdquo; he continued,
looking at the stone, which he held in his
hand, with burning eyes. &ldquo;I wish I could
choke him with it!&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Stop! Stop! God preserve you, friend!&rdquo;
broke in the distiller, looking pale. &ldquo;God keep
you in this world and the next, but don't curse
anyone so.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Ah! now we have his defender! May he be
ruined!&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Listen, friend! You don't know what happened
to my late mother-in-law.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Your mother-in-law?&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Yes, my mother-in-law. One evening,
perhaps rather earlier than this, they were sitting
at supper, my late mother-in-law, my father-in-law,
their two servants, and five children. My
mother-in-law emptied some dumplings from the
cooking-pot into a dish in order to cool them.
But the others, being hungry after the day's

work, did not wait till they were quite cooled, but
stuck their long wooden forks into them and ate
them at once. All at once a stranger entered&mdash;heaven
knows whence!&mdash;and asked to be allowed
to share their meal. They could not refuse to
feed a hungry man, and gave him also a wooden
fork. But the guest made as short work with
the dumplings as a cow with hay. Before the
family had each of them finished his or her
dumpling and reached out their forks again for
another, the dish had been swept as clean as
the floor of a nobleman's drawing-room. My
mother-in-law emptied out some more dumplings;
she thought to herself, &lsquo;Now the guest is
satisfied, and will not be so greedy.&rsquo; But on the
contrary, he began to swallow them faster than
ever, and emptied the second dish also. &lsquo;May
one of them choke you!&rsquo; said my mother-in-law
under her breath. Suddenly the guest seemed
to try to clear his throat, and fell back. They
rushed to his help, but his breath had stopped
and he was dead.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Served him right, the cursed glutton!&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;But it turned out quite otherwise; since that
time my mother-in-law has no rest. No sooner
is it dark than the dead man approaches the
house. He then sits astride the chimney, the
scoundrel, holding a dumpling between his teeth.
During the day it is quite quiet&mdash;one hears and
sees nothing; but as soon as it begins to grow

dark, and one casts a look at the roof, there he
is comfortably perched on the chimney!&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;A wonderful story, friend! I heard something
similar from my late<span style="white-space: nowrap;">&mdash;&mdash;</span>&rdquo;</p>

<p>Then the headman suddenly stopped. Outside
there were noises, and the stamping of
dancers' feet. The strings of a guitar were
being struck gently, to the accompaniment of
a voice. Then the guitar was played more
loudly, many voices joined in, and the whole
chorus struck up a song in ridicule of the
headman.</p>

<p>When it was over, the distiller said, with his
head bent a little on one side, to the headman
who was almost petrified by the audacity of the
serenaders, &ldquo;A fine song, my friend!&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Very fine! Only it is a pity that they insult
the headman.&rdquo;</p>

<p>He folded his arms with a certain measure of
composure on the table, and prepared to listen
further, for the singing and noise outside continued.
A sharp observer, however, would have
seen that it was not mere torpidity which made
the headman sit so quietly. In the same way a
crafty cat often allows an inexperienced mouse
to play about her tail, while she is quickly devising
a plan to cut it off from the mouse-hole.
The headman's one eye was still fastened on
the window, and his hand, after he had given
the village councillor a sign, was reaching for

the door-handle, when suddenly a loud noise
and shouts were heard from the street. The
distiller, who beside many other characteristics
possessed a keen curiosity, laid down his pipe
quickly and ran into the street; but the ne'er-do-wells
had all dispersed.</p>

<p>&ldquo;No, you don't escape me!&rdquo; cried the
headman, dragging someone muffled up in a
sheepskin coat with the hair turned outwards, by
the arm.</p>

<p>The distiller rapidly seized a favourable
moment to look at the face of this disturber of
the peace; but he started back when he saw a
long beard and a grim, painted face.</p>

<p>&ldquo;No, you don't escape me!&rdquo; exclaimed the
headman again as he dragged his prisoner into
the vestibule.</p>

<p>The latter offered no resistance, and followed
him as quietly as though it had been his own
house.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Karpo, open the store-room!&rdquo; the headman
called to the village councillor. &ldquo;We will
throw him in there! Then we will awake the
clerk, call the village council together, catch this
impudent rabble, and pass our sentence on them
at once.&rdquo;</p>

<p>The village councillor unlocked the store-room;
then in the darkness of the vestibule, the
prisoner made a desperate effort to break loose
from the headman's arms.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Ah! you would, would you?&rdquo; exclaimed
the headman, holding him more firmly by the
collar.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Let me go! It is I!&rdquo; a half-stifled voice
was heard saying.</p>

<p>&ldquo;It is no good, brother! You may squeal if
you choose, like the devil, instead of imitating
a woman, but you won't get round me.&rdquo; So
saying, he thrust the prisoner with such violence
into the dark room that he fell on the ground and
groaned aloud.</p>

<p>The victorious headman, accompanied by the
village councillor, now betook himself to the
clerk's; they were followed by the distiller, who
was veiled in clouds of tobacco-smoke, and
resembled a steamer.</p>

<p>They were all three walking reflectively with
bent heads, when suddenly, turning into a dark
side-alley, they uttered a cry and started back in
consequence of coming into collision with three
other men, who on their side shouted with equal
loudness. The headman saw with his one eye,
to his no small astonishment, the clerk with two
village councillors.</p>

<p>&ldquo;I was just coming to you, Mr Notary.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;And I was on my way to your honour.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;These are strange goings-on, Mr Notary.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Indeed they are, your honour.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Have you seen them then?&rdquo; asked the
headman, surprised.</p>

<p>&ldquo;The young fellows are roaming about the
streets using vile language. They are abusing
your honour in a way&mdash;in a word, it is a scandal.
A drunken Russian would be ashamed to use
such words.&rdquo;</p>

<p>The lean notary, in his gaily striped breeches
and yeast-coloured waistcoat, kept on stretching
forward and drawing back his neck while he
talked.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Hardly had I gone to sleep,&rdquo; he continued,
&ldquo;than the cursed loafers woke me up with their
shameful songs and their noise. I meant to give
them a sound rating, but while I was putting on
my breeches and vest, they all ran away. But
the ringleader has not escaped; for the present
he is shut up in the hut which we use as a prison.
I was very curious to know who the scapegrace
is, but his face is as sooty as the devil's when
he forges nails for sinners.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;What clothes does he wear, Mr Notary?&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;The son of a dog wears a black sheepskin
coat turned inside out, your honour.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Aren't you telling me a lie, Mr Notary?
The same good-for-nothing is now shut up in my
store-room under lock and key.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;No, your honour! You have drawn the
long bow a little yourself, and should not be
vexed at what I say.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Bring a light! We will take a look at him
at once!&rdquo;</p>

<p>They returned to the headman's house; the
store-room door was opened, and the headman
groaned for sheer amazement as he saw his sister-in-law
standing before him.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Tell me then,&rdquo; she said, stepping forward,
&ldquo;have you quite lost your senses? Had you a
single particle of brains in your one-eyed fish-head
when you locked me up in the dark <ins title="room.">room?</ins>
It is a mercy I did not break my head against the
iron door hinge. Didn't I shout out that it was
I? Then he seized me, the cursed bear, with
his iron claws, and pushed me in. May Satan
hereafter so push you into hell!&rdquo; The last
words she spoke from the street, having wisely
gone out of his reach.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Yes, now I see that it is you!&rdquo; said
the headman, who had slowly recovered his
composure.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Is he not a scamp and a scoundrel, Mr
Clerk?&rdquo; he continued.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Yes, certainly, your honour.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Isn't it high time to give all these loose
fellows a lesson, that they may at last betake
themselves to their work?&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Yes, it is high time, your honour.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;The fools have combined in a gang. What
the deuce is that? It sounded like my sister-in-law's
voice. The blockheads think that I am
like her, an ordinary Cossack.&rdquo;</p>

<p>Here he coughed and cleared his throat, and

a gleam in his eyes showed that he was about to
say something very important. &ldquo;In the year
one thousand&mdash;I cannot keep these cursed dates
in my memory, if I was to be killed for it.
Well, never mind when it was, the Commissary
Ledatcho was commanded to choose out a
Cossack who was cleverer than the rest. Yes,&rdquo;
he added, raising his forefinger, &ldquo;cleverer than
the rest, to accompany the Czar. Then I
was<span style="white-space: nowrap;">&mdash;&mdash;</span>&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Yes, yes,&rdquo; the notary interrupted him, &ldquo;we
all know, headman, that you well deserved the
imperial favour. But confess now that I was
right: you made a mistake when you declared
that you had caught the vagabond in the reversed
sheepskin.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;This disguised devil I will have imprisoned
to serve as a warning to the rest. They will have
to learn what authority means. Who has appointed
the headman, if not the Czar? Then we
will tackle the other fellows. I don't forget how
the scamps drove a whole herd of swine into my
garden, which ate up all the cabbages and
cucumbers; I don't forget how those sons of
devils refused to thrash my rye for me. I don't
forget&mdash;to the deuce with them! We must first
find out who this scoundrel in the sheepskin
really is.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;He is a sly dog anyway,&rdquo; said the distiller,
whose cheeks during the whole conversation had

been as full of smoke as a siege-cannon, and
whose lips, when he took his pipe out of his
mouth, seemed to emit sparks.</p>

<p>Meanwhile they had approached a small ruined
hut. Their curiosity had mounted to the highest
pitch, and they pressed round the door. The
notary produced a key and tried to turn the lock,
but it did not fit; it was the key of his trunk.
The impatience of the onlookers increased. He
plunged his hand into the wide pocket of his gaily
striped breeches, bent his back, scraped with his
feet, uttered imprecations, and at last cried
triumphantly, &ldquo;I have it!&rdquo;</p>

<p>At these words the hearts of our heroes beat
so loud, that the turning of the key in the lock
was almost inaudible. At last the door opened,
and the headman turned as white as a sheet.
The distiller felt a shiver run down his spine, and
his hair stood on end. Terror and apprehension
were stamped on the notary's face; the village
councillors almost sank into the ground and could
not shut their wide-open mouths. Before them
stood the headman's sister-in-law!</p>

<p>She was not less startled than they, but
recovered herself somewhat, and made a movement
as if to approach them.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Stop!&rdquo; cried the headman in an excited
voice, and slammed the door again. &ldquo;Sirs,
Satan is behind this!&rdquo; he continued. &ldquo;Bring
fire quickly! Never mind the hut! Set it

alight and burn it up so that not even the witch's
bones remain.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Wait a minute, brother!&rdquo; exclaimed the
distiller. &ldquo;Your hair is grey, but you are not
very intelligent; no ordinary fire will burn a
witch. Only the fire of a pipe can do it. I will
manage it all right.&rdquo; So saying, he shook some
glowing ashes from his pipe on to a bundle of
straw, and began to fan the flame.</p>

<p>Despair gave the unfortunate woman courage;
she began to implore them in a loud voice.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Stop a moment, brother! Perhaps we are
incurring guilt needlessly. Perhaps she is really
no witch!&rdquo; said the notary. &ldquo;If the person
sitting in there declares herself ready to make
the sign of the cross, then she is not a child of
the devil.&rdquo;</p>

<p>The proposal was accepted. &ldquo;Look out,
Satan!&rdquo; continued the notary, speaking at a
chink in the door. &ldquo;If you promise not to
move, we will open the door.&rdquo;</p>

<p>The door was opened.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Cross yourself!&rdquo; exclaimed the headman,
looking round him for a safe place of retreat in
case of necessity.</p>

<p>His sister-in-law crossed herself.</p>

<p>&ldquo;The deuce! It is really you, sister-in-law!&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;What evil spirit dragged you into this hole,
friend?&rdquo; asked the notary.</p>

<p>The headman's sister related amid sobs how
the rioters had seized her on the street, and in
spite of her resistance, pushed her through a
large window into the hut, on which they had
closed the shutters. The notary looked and
found that the bolt of the shutter had been
wrenched off, and that it was held in its place by
a wooden bar placed across it outside.</p>

<p>&ldquo;You are a nice fellow, you one-eyed
Satan!&rdquo; she now exclaimed, advancing towards
the headman, who stepped backwards and continued
to contemplate her from head to foot.
&ldquo;I know your thoughts; you were glad of an
opportunity to get me shut up in order to run
after that petticoat, so that no one could see the
grey-haired sinner making a fool of himself.
You think I don't know how you talked this
evening with Hanna. Oh, I know everything.
You must get up earlier if you want to make a
fool of me, you great stupid! I have endured
for a long time, but at last don't take it ill
if<span style="white-space: nowrap;">&mdash;&mdash;</span>&rdquo;</p>

<p>She made a threatening gesture with her fist,
and ran away swiftly, leaving the headman quite
taken aback.</p>

<p>&ldquo;The devil really has something to do with
it!&rdquo; he thought, rubbing his bald head.</p>

<p>&ldquo;We have him!&rdquo; now exclaimed the two
village councillors as they approached.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Whom have you?&rdquo; asked the headman.</p>

<p>&ldquo;The devil in the sheepskin.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Bring him here!&rdquo; cried the headman,
seizing the prisoner by the arm. &ldquo;Are you
mad? This is the drunken Kalenik!&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;It is witchcraft! He was in our hands,
your honour!&rdquo; replied the village councillors.
&ldquo;The rascals were rushing about in the narrow
side-streets, dancing and behaving like idiots&mdash;the
devil take them! How it was we got hold of
this fellow instead of him, heaven only knows!&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;In virtue of my authority, and that of the
village assembly,&rdquo; said the headman, &ldquo;I issue
the order to seize these robbers and other young
vagabonds which may be met with in the streets,
and to bring them before me to be dealt with.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Excuse us, your honour,&rdquo; answered the
village councillors, bowing low. &ldquo;If you could
only see the hideous faces they had; may heaven
punish us if ever anyone has seen such miscreations
since he was born and baptised. These
devils might frighten one into an illness.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;I'll teach you to be afraid! You won't
obey then? You are certainly in the conspiracy
with them! You mutineers! What is the
meaning of that? What? You abet robbery
and murder! You!&mdash;I will inform the Commissary.
Go at once, do you hear; fly like birds.
I shall&mdash;you will<span style="white-space: nowrap;">&mdash;&mdash;</span>&rdquo;</p>

<p>They all dispersed in different directions.</p>

<h3>V<br/>
<small>THE DROWNED GIRL</small></h3>

<p>Without troubling himself in the least about
those who had been sent to pursue him, the
originator of all this confusion slowly walked
towards the old house and the pool. We hardly
need to say it was Levko. His black fur coat
was buttoned up; he carried his cap in his hand,
and the perspiration was pouring down his face.
The moon poured her light on the gloomy majesty
of the dark maple-wood.</p>

<p>The coolness of the air round the motionless
pool enticed the weary wanderer to rest by it a
while. Universal silence prevailed, only that in
the forest thickets the nightingales' songs were
heard. An overpowering drowsiness closed his
eyes; his tired limbs relaxed, and his head
nodded.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Ah! am I going to sleep?&rdquo; he said, rising
and rubbing his eyes.</p>

<p>He looked round; the night seemed to him still
more beautiful. The moonlight seemed to have
an intoxicating quality about it, a glamour which
he had never perceived before. The landscape
was veiled in a silver mist. The air was redolent
with the perfume of the apple-blossoms and

the night-flowers. Entranced, he gazed on the
motionless pool. The old, half-ruined house
was clearly reflected without a quiver in the
water. But instead of dark shutters, he saw
light streaming from brilliantly lit windows.
Presently one of them opened. Holding his
breath, and without moving a muscle, he fastened
his eyes on the pool and seemed to penetrate
its depths. What did he see? First he saw
at the window a graceful, curly head with shining
eyes, propped on a white arm; the head moved
and smiled. His heart suddenly began to beat.
The water began to break into ripples, and the
window closed.</p>

<p>Quietly he withdrew from the pool, and looked
towards the house. The dark shutters were
flung back; the window-panes gleamed in the
moonlight. &ldquo;How little one can believe what
people say!&rdquo; he thought to himself. &ldquo;The
house is <ins title="bran-new">brand-new</ins>, and looks as though it
had only just been painted. It is certainly
inhabited.&rdquo;</p>

<p>He stepped nearer cautiously, but the house
was quite silent. The clear song of the nightingales
rose powerfully and distinctly on the air,
and as they died away one heard the chirping
and rustling of the grasshoppers, and the
marshbird clapping his slippery beak in the
water.</p>

<p>Levko felt enraptured with the sweetness and

stillness of the night. He struck the strings of
his guitar and sang:</p>

<div class="poetry width145">
<div class="stanza">
<div class="line">&ldquo;Oh lovely moon<br/></div>
<div class="line indent3">Thou steepst in light<br/></div>
<div class="line indent1">The house where my darling<br/></div>
<div class="line indent3">Sleeps all night.&rdquo;<br/></div>
</div>
</div>

<p>A window opened gently, and the same girl
whose image he had seen in the pool looked out
and listened attentively to the song. Her long-lashed
eyelids were partly drooping over her
eyes; she was as pale as the moonlight, but
wonderfully beautiful. She smiled, and a shiver
ran through Levko.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Sing me a song, young Cossack!&rdquo; she said
gently, bending her head sideways and quite
closing her eyes.</p>

<p>&ldquo;What song shall I sing you, dear girl?&rdquo;</p>

<p>Tears rolled down her pale cheeks.
&ldquo;Cossack,&rdquo; she said, and there was something
inexpressibly touching in her tone, &ldquo;Cossack,
find my stepmother for me. I will do everything
for you; I will reward you; I will give you
abundant riches. I have armlets embroidered
with silk and coral necklaces; I will give you a
girdle set with pearls. I have gold. Cossack,
seek my stepmother for me. She is a terrible
witch; she allowed me no peace in the beautiful
world. She tortured me; she made me work like
a common maid-servant. Look at my face; she

has banished the redness from my cheeks with
her unholy magic. Look at my white neck; they
cannot be washed away, they cannot be washed
away&mdash;the blue marks of her iron claws. Look
at my white feet; they did not walk on carpets,
but on hot sand, on damp ground, on piercing
thorns. And my eyes&mdash;look at them; they are
almost blind with weeping. Seek my stepmother!&rdquo;</p>

<p>Her voice, which had gradually become louder,
stopped, and she wept.</p>

<p>The Cossack felt overpowered by sympathy and
grief. &ldquo;I am ready to do everything to please
you, dear lady,&rdquo; he cried with deep emotion;
&ldquo;but where and how can I find her?&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Look, look!&rdquo; she said quickly, &ldquo;she is
here! She dances on the lake-shore with my
maidens, and warms herself in the moonlight.
Yet she is cunning and sly. She has assumed the
shape of one who is drowned, yet I know and
hear that she is present. I am so afraid of her.
Because of her I cannot swim free and light as a
fish. I sink and fall to the bottom like a piece
of iron. Look for her, Cossack!&rdquo;</p>

<p>Levko cast a glance at the lake-shore. In a
silvery mist there moved, like shadows, girls in
white dresses decked with May flowers; gold
necklaces and coins gleamed on their necks; but
they were very pale, as though formed of transparent
clouds. They danced nearer him, and he

could hear their voices, somewhat like the sound
of reeds stirred in the quiet evening by the
breeze.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Let us play the raven-game! Let us play
the raven-game!&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Who will be the raven?&rdquo;</p>

<p>Lots were cast, and a girl stepped out of the
line of the dancers.</p>

<p>Levko observed her attentively. Her face and
clothing resembled those of the others; but she
was evidently unwilling to play the part assigned
her. The dancers revolved rapidly round her,
without her being able to catch one of
them.</p>

<p>&ldquo;No, I won't be the raven any more,&rdquo; she
said, quite exhausted. &ldquo;I do not like to rob the
poor mother-hen of her chickens.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;You are not a witch,&rdquo; thought Levko.</p>

<p>The girls again gathered together in order to
cast lots who should be the raven.</p>

<p>&ldquo;I will be the raven!&rdquo; called one from the
midst.</p>

<p>Levko watched her closely. Boldly and
rapidly she ran after the dancers, and made every
effort to catch her prey. Levko began to notice
that her body was not transparent like the
others; there was something black in the midst
of it. Suddenly there was a cry; the &ldquo;raven&rdquo;
had rushed on a girl, embraced her, and it
seemed to Levko as though she had stretched out

claws, and as though her face shone with
malicious joy.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Witch!&rdquo; he cried out, pointing at her
suddenly with his finger, and turning towards the
house.</p>

<p>The girl at the window laughed, and the
other girls dragged the &ldquo;raven&rdquo; screaming
along with them.</p>

<p>&ldquo;How shall I reward you, Cossack?&rdquo; said
the maiden. &ldquo;I know you do not need gold;
you love Hanna, but her harsh father will not
allow you to marry. But give him this note, and
he will cease to hinder it.&rdquo;</p>

<p>She stretched out her white hand, and her face
shone wonderfully. With strange shudders and
a beating heart, he grasped the paper and&mdash;awoke.</p>

<h3>VI<br/>
<small>THE AWAKENING</small></h3>

<p>&ldquo;Have I then been really asleep?&rdquo; Levko
asked himself as he stood up. &ldquo;Everything
seemed so real, as though I were awake. Wonderful!
Wonderful!&rdquo; he repeated, looking
round him. The position of the moon vertical
overhead showed that it was midnight; a waft of
coolness came from the pool. The ruined house

with the closed shutters stood there with a
melancholy aspect; the moss and weeds which
grew thickly upon it showed that it had not been
entered by any human foot for a long time.
Then he suddenly opened his hand, which had
been convulsively clenched during his sleep, and
cried aloud with astonishment when he saw the
note in it. &ldquo;Ah! if I could only read,&rdquo; he
thought, turning it this way and that. At that
moment he heard a noise behind him.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Fear nothing! Lay hold of him! What
are you afraid of? There are ten of us. I
wager that he is a man, and not the devil.&rdquo;</p>

<p>It was the headman encouraging his companions.</p>

<p>Levko felt himself seized by several arms,
many of which were trembling with fear.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Throw off your mask, friend! Cease trying
to fool us,&rdquo; said the headman, taking him by
the collar. But he started back when he saw
him closely. &ldquo;Levko! My son!&rdquo; he exclaimed,
letting his arms sink. &ldquo;It is you,
miserable boy! I thought some rascal, or disguised
devil, was playing these tricks; but now
it seems you have cooked this mess for your own
father&mdash;placed yourself at the head of a band
of robbers, and composed songs to ridicule
him. Eh, Levko! What is the meaning of
that? It seems your back is itching. Tie him
fast!&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Stop, father! I have been ordered to give
you this note,&rdquo; said Levko.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Let me see it then! But bind him all the
same.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Wait, headman,&rdquo; said the notary, unfolding
the note; &ldquo;it is the Commissary's handwriting!&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;The Commissary's?&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;The Commissary's?&rdquo; echoed the village
councillors mechanically.</p>

<p>&ldquo;The Commissary's? Wonderful! Still
more incomprehensible!&rdquo; thought Levko.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Read! Read!&rdquo; said the headman. &ldquo;What
does the Commissary write?&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Let us hear!&rdquo; exclaimed the distiller,
holding his pipe between his teeth, and lighting
it.</p>

<p>The notary cleared his throat and began to
read.</p>

<blockquote>
<p>&ldquo;&lsquo;Order to the headman, <span class="small-caps">Javtuk Makohonenko</span>.</p>

<p>&ldquo;&lsquo;It has been brought to our knowledge that
you, old id<span style="white-space: nowrap;">&mdash;&mdash;</span>&rsquo;&rdquo;</p>
</blockquote>

<p>&ldquo;Stop! Stop! That is unnecessary!&rdquo; exclaimed
the headman. &ldquo;Even if I have not
heard it, I know that that is not the chief matter.
Read further!&rdquo;</p>

<blockquote>
<p>&ldquo;&lsquo;Consequently I order you at once to marry
your son, Levko Makohonenko, to the Cossack's
daughter, Hanna Petritchenka, to repair the
bridges on the post-road, and to give no horses
belonging to the lords of the manor to the
county-court magistrates without my knowledge.
If on my arrival I do not find these orders carried
out, I shall hold you singly responsible.</p>

<p>&ldquo;&lsquo;Lieut. <span class="small-caps">Kosma Derkatch-Drischpanowski</span>,</p>

<p class="center">&ldquo;&lsquo;<i>Commissary</i>.&rsquo;&rdquo;</p>
</blockquote>

<p>&ldquo;There we have it!&rdquo; exclaimed the headman,
with his mouth open. &ldquo;Have you heard
it? The headman is made responsible for everything,
and therefore everyone has to obey him
without contradiction! Otherwise, I beg to resign
my office. And you,&rdquo; he continued, turning to
Levko, &ldquo;I will have married, as the Commissary
directs, though it seems to me strange how he
knows of the affair; but you will get a taste of my
knout first&mdash;the one, you know, which hangs on
the wall at my bed-head. But how did you get
hold of the note?&rdquo;</p>

<p>Levko, in spite of the astonishment which the
unexpected turn of affairs caused him, had had
the foresight to prepare an answer, and to conceal
the way in which the note had come into
his possession. &ldquo;I was in the town last night,&rdquo;
he said, &ldquo;and met the Commissary just as
he was alighting from his droshky. When he
heard from which village I was he gave me the

note and bid me tell you by word of mouth,
father, that he would dine with us on his way
back.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Did he say that?&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Yes.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Have you heard it?&rdquo; said the headman,
with a solemn air turning to his companions.
&ldquo;The Commissary himself, in his own person,
comes to us, that is to me, to dine.&rdquo; The
headman lifted a finger and bent his head as
though he were listening to something. &ldquo;The
Commissary, do you hear, the Commissary is
coming to dine with me! What do you think,
Mr Notary? And what do you think, friend?
That is not a little honour, is it?&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;As far as I can recollect,&rdquo; the notary broke
in, &ldquo;no Commissary has ever dined with a
headman.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;All headmen are not alike,&rdquo; he answered
with a self-satisfied air. Then he uttered a
hoarse laugh and said, &ldquo;What do you think,
Mr Notary? Isn't it right to order that in
honour of the distinguished guest, a fowl, linen,
and other things should be offered by every
cottage?&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Yes, they should.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;And when is the wedding to be, father?&rdquo;
asked Levko.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Wedding! I should like to celebrate your
wedding in my way! Well, in honour of the

distinguished guest, to-morrow the pope<a name="FNanchor_1" href="#Footnote_1" class="fnanchor">(1)</a> will
marry you. Let the Commissary see that you
are punctual. Now, children, we will go to bed.
Go to your houses. The present occasion
reminds me of the time when I<span style="white-space: nowrap;">&mdash;&mdash;</span>&rdquo; At these
words the headman assumed his customary
solemn air.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Now the headman will relate how he accompanied
the Czarina!&rdquo; said Levko to himself, and
hastened quickly, and full of joy, to the cherry-tree-shaded
house, which we know. &ldquo;May God
bless you, beloved, and the holy angels smile
on you. To no one will I relate the wonders of
this night except to you, Hanna; you alone will
believe it, and pray with me for the repose of the
souls of the poor drowned maidens.&rdquo;</p>

<p>He approached the house; the window was
open; the moonbeams fell on Hanna, who was
sleeping by it. Her head was supported on her
arm; her cheeks glowed; her lips moved, gently
murmuring his name.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Sleep sweetly, my darling. Dream of
everything that is good, and yet the awaking will
surpass all.&rdquo; He made the sign of the cross
over her, closed the window, and gently withdrew.</p>

<p>In a few moments the whole village was buried
in slumber. Only the moon hung as brilliant
and wonderful as before in the immensity of

the Ukraine sky. The divine night continued
her reign in solemn stillness, while the earth
lay bathed in silvery radiance. The universal
silence was only broken here and there by the
bark of a dog; only the drunken Kalenik still
wandered about the empty streets seeking for his
house.</p>

<h2>THE VIY</h2>

<blockquote>
<p>(The &ldquo;Viy&rdquo; is a monstrous creation of popular
fancy. It is the name which the inhabitants of
Little Russia give to the king of the gnomes, whose
eyelashes reach to the ground. The following story
is a specimen of such folk-lore. I have made no
alterations, but reproduce it in the same simple form
in which I heard it.&mdash;<span class="small-caps">Author's Note.</span>)</p>
</blockquote>

<h3>I</h3>

<p class="no-indent"><span class="small-caps">As</span> soon as the clear seminary bell began
sounding in Kieff in the morning, the pupils
would come flocking from all parts of the town.
The students of grammar, rhetoric, philosophy,
and theology hastened with their books under
their arms over the streets.</p>

<p>The &ldquo;grammarians&rdquo; were still mere boys.
On the way they pushed against each other and
quarrelled with shrill voices. Nearly all of them
wore torn or dirty clothes, and their pockets were
always crammed with all kinds of things&mdash;push-bones,
pipes made out of pens, remains of confectionery,
and sometimes even young sparrows.
The latter would sometimes begin to chirp in the
midst of deep silence in the school, and bring

down on their possessors severe canings and
thrashings.</p>

<p>The &ldquo;rhetoricians&rdquo; walked in a more orderly
way. Their clothes were generally untorn, but
on the other hand their faces were often
strangely decorated; one had a black eye, and
the lips of another resembled a single blister,
etc. These spoke to each other in tenor
voices.</p>

<p>The &ldquo;philosophers&rdquo; talked in a tone an
octave lower; in their pockets they only had
fragments of tobacco, never whole cakes of it;
for what they could get hold of, they used at
once. They smelt so strongly of tobacco and
brandy, that a workman passing by them would
often remain standing and sniffing with his nose
in the air, like a hound.</p>

<p>About this time of day the market-place was
generally full of bustle, and the market women,
selling rolls, cakes, and honey-tarts, plucked the
sleeves of those who wore coats of fine cloth or
cotton.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Young sir! Young sir! Here! Here!&rdquo;
they cried from all sides. &ldquo;Rolls and cakes
and tasty tarts, very delicious! I have baked
them myself!&rdquo;</p>

<p>Another drew something long and crooked
out of her basket and cried, &ldquo;Here is a sausage,
young sir! Buy a sausage!&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Don't buy anything from her!&rdquo; cried a

rival. &ldquo;See how greasy she is, and what a
dirty nose and hands she has!&rdquo;</p>

<p>But the market women carefully avoided
appealing to the philosophers and theologians,
for these only took handfuls of eatables merely
to taste them.</p>

<p>Arrived at the seminary, the whole crowd of
students dispersed into the low, large class-rooms
with small windows, broad doors, and
blackened benches. Suddenly they were filled
with a many-toned murmur. The teachers
heard the pupils' lessons repeated, some in shrill
and others in deep voices which sounded like a
distant booming. While the lessons were being
said, the teachers kept a sharp eye open to see
whether pieces of cake or other dainties were
protruding from their pupils' pockets; if so, they
were promptly confiscated.</p>

<p>When this learned crowd arrived somewhat
earlier than usual, or when it was known that the
teachers would come somewhat late, a battle
would ensue, as though planned by general
agreement. In this battle all had to take part,
even the monitors who were appointed to look
after the order and morality of the whole school.
Two theologians generally arranged the conditions
of the battle: whether each class should
split into two sides, or whether all the pupils
should divide themselves into two halves.</p>

<p>In each case the grammarians began the battle,

and after the rhetoricians had joined in, the
former retired and stood on the benches, in order
to watch the fortunes of the fray. Then came
the philosophers with long black moustaches, and
finally the thick-necked theologians. The battle
generally ended in a victory for the latter,
and the philosophers retired to the different
class-rooms rubbing their aching limbs, and
throwing themselves on the benches to take
breath.</p>

<p>When the teacher, who in his own time had
taken part in such contests, entered the class-room
he saw by the heated faces of his pupils that
the battle had been very severe, and while he
caned the hands of the rhetoricians, in another
room another teacher did the same for the
philosophers.</p>

<p>On Sundays and Festival Days the seminarists
took puppet-theatres to the citizens' houses.
Sometimes they acted a comedy, and in that case
it was always a theologian who took the part of
the hero or heroine&mdash;Potiphar or Herodias, etc.
As a reward for their exertions, they received a
piece of linen, a sack of maize, half a roast
goose, or something similar. All the students,
lay and clerical, were very poorly provided with
means for procuring themselves necessary subsistence,
but at the same time very fond of
eating; so that, however much food was given
to them, they were never satisfied, and the

gifts bestowed by rich landowners were never
adequate for their needs.</p>

<p>Therefore the Commissariat Committee, consisting
of philosophers and theologians, sometimes
dispatched the grammarians and rhetoricians
under the leadership of a philosopher&mdash;themselves
sometimes joining in the expedition&mdash;with
sacks on their shoulders, into the town, in
order to levy a contribution on the fleshpots of
the citizens, and then there was a feast in the
seminary.</p>

<p>The most important event in the seminary year
was the arrival of the holidays; these began in
July, and then generally all the students went
home. At that time all the roads were thronged
with grammarians, rhetoricians, philosophers,
and theologians. He who had no home of his own,
would take up his quarters with some fellow-student's
family; the philosophers and theologians
looked out for tutors' posts, taught the
children of rich farmers, and received for doing
so a pair of new boots and sometimes also a new
coat.</p>

<p>A whole troop of them would go off in close
ranks like a regiment; they cooked their porridge
in common, and encamped under the open sky.
Each had a bag with him containing a shirt and
a pair of socks. The theologians were especially
economical; in order not to wear out their boots
too quickly, they took them off and carried them

on a stick over their shoulders, especially when
the road was very muddy. Then they tucked
up their breeches over their knees and waded
bravely through the pools and puddles. Whenever
they spied a village near the highway, they
at once left it, approached the house which
seemed the most considerable, and began with
loud voices to sing a psalm. The master of the
house, an old Cossack engaged in agriculture,
would listen for a long time with his head propped
in his hands, then with tears on his cheeks say
to his wife, &ldquo;What the students are singing
sounds very devout; bring out some lard and
anything else of the kind we have in the house.&rdquo;</p>

<p>After thus replenishing their stores, the
students would continue their way. The farther
they went, the smaller grew their numbers, as
they dispersed to their various houses, and left
those whose homes were still farther on.</p>

<p>On one occasion, during such a march, three
students left the main-road in order to get
provisions in some village, since their stock had
long been exhausted. This party consisted of
the theologian Khalava, the philosopher Thomas
Brutus, and the rhetorician Tiberius Gorobetz.</p>

<p>The first was a tall youth with broad shoulders
and of a peculiar character; everything which
came within reach of his fingers he felt obliged
to appropriate. Moreover, he was of a very
melancholy disposition, and when he had got

intoxicated he hid himself in the most tangled
thickets so that the seminary officials had the
greatest trouble in finding him.</p>

<p>The philosopher Thomas Brutus was a more
cheerful character. He liked to lie for a long
time on the same spot and smoke his pipe; and
when he was merry with wine, he hired a fiddler
and danced the &ldquo;tropak.&rdquo; Often he got a
whole quantity of &ldquo;beans,&rdquo; i.e. thrashings;
but these he endured with complete philosophic
calm, saying that a man cannot escape his
destiny.</p>

<p>The rhetorician Tiberius Gorobetz had not yet
the right to wear a moustache, to drink brandy,
or to smoke tobacco. He only wore a small crop
of hair, as though his character was at present
too little developed. To judge by the great
bumps on his forehead, with which he often
appeared in the class-room, it might be expected
that some day he would be a valiant fighter.
Khalava and Thomas often pulled his hair as a
mark of their special favour, and sent him on
their errands.</p>

<p>Evening had already come when they left the
high-road; the sun had just gone down, and the
air was still heavy with the heat of the day. The
theologian and the philosopher strolled along,
smoking in silence, while the rhetorician struck
off the heads of the thistles by the wayside with
his stick. The way wound on through thick

woods of oak and walnut; green hills alternated
here and there with meadows. Twice already
they had seen cornfields, from which they concluded
that they were near some village; but an
hour had already passed, and no human habitation
appeared. The sky was already quite dark,
and only a red gleam lingered on the western
horizon.</p>

<p>&ldquo;The deuce!&rdquo; said the philosopher Thomas
Brutus. &ldquo;I was almost certain we would soon
reach a village.&rdquo;</p>

<p>The theologian still remained silent, looked
round him, then put his pipe again between his
teeth, and all three continued their way.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Good heavens!&rdquo; exclaimed the philosopher,
and stood still. &ldquo;Now the road itself is disappearing.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Perhaps we shall find a farm farther on,&rdquo;
answered the theologian, without taking his pipe
out of his mouth.</p>

<p>Meanwhile the night had descended; clouds
increased the darkness, and according to all
appearance there was no chance of moon or stars
appearing. The seminarists found that they had
lost the way altogether.</p>

<p>After the philosopher had vainly sought for a
footpath, he exclaimed, &ldquo;Where have we got
to?&rdquo;</p>

<p>The theologian thought for a while, and said,
&ldquo;Yes, it is really dark.&rdquo;</p>

<p>The rhetorician went on one side, lay on the
ground, and groped for a path; but his hands
encountered only fox-holes. All around lay a
huge steppe over which no one seemed to have
passed. The wanderers made several efforts to
get forward, but the landscape grew wilder and
more inhospitable.</p>

<p>The philosopher tried to shout, but his voice
was lost in vacancy, no one answered; only, some
moments later, they heard a faint groaning
sound, like the whimpering of a wolf.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Curse it all! What shall we do?&rdquo; said the
philosopher.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Why, just stop here, and spend the night in
the open air,&rdquo; answered the theologian. So
saying, he felt in his pocket, brought out his
timber and steel, and lit his pipe.</p>

<p>But the philosopher could not agree with this
proposal; he was not accustomed to sleep till he
had first eaten five pounds of bread and five of
dripping, and so he now felt an intolerable
emptiness in his stomach. Besides, in spite of
his cheerful temperament, he was a little afraid
of the wolves.</p>

<p>&ldquo;No, Khalava,&rdquo; he said, &ldquo;that won't do.
To lie down like a dog and without any supper!
Let us try once more; perhaps we shall find a
house, and the consolation of having a glass of
brandy to drink before going to sleep.&rdquo;</p>

<p>At the word &ldquo;brandy,&rdquo; the theologian spat

on one side and said, &ldquo;Yes, of course, we cannot
remain all night in the open air.&rdquo;</p>

<p>The students went on and on, and to their great
joy they heard the barking of dogs in the distance.
After listening a while to see from which
direction the barking came, they went on their
way with new courage, and soon espied a light.</p>

<p>&ldquo;A village, by heavens, a village!&rdquo; exclaimed
the philosopher.</p>

<p>His supposition proved correct; they soon saw
two or three houses built round a court-yard.
Lights glimmered in the windows, and before
the fence stood a number of trees. The students
looked through the crevices of the gates and saw
a court-yard in which stood a large number of
roving tradesmen's carts. In the sky there were
now fewer clouds, and here and there a star was
visible.</p>

<p>&ldquo;See, brother!&rdquo; one of them said, &ldquo;we must
now cry &lsquo;halt!&rsquo; Cost what it may, we must find
entrance and a night's lodging.&rdquo;</p>

<p>The three students knocked together at the
gate, and cried &ldquo;Open!&rdquo;</p>

<p>The door of one of the houses creaked on its
hinges, and an old woman wrapped in a sheepskin
appeared. &ldquo;Who is there?&rdquo; she exclaimed,
coughing loudly.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Let us spend the night here, mother; we
have lost our way, our stomachs are empty, and
we do not want to spend the night out of doors.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;But what sort of people are you?&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Quite harmless people; the theologian
Khalava, the philosopher Brutus, and the
rhetorician Gorobetz.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;It is impossible,&rdquo; answered the old woman.
&ldquo;The whole house is full of people, and every
corner occupied. Where can I put you up?
You are big and heavy enough to break the house
down. I know these philosophers and theologians;
when once one takes them in, they eat one
out of house and home. Go farther on! There
is no room here for you!&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Have pity on us, mother! How can you be
so heartless? Don't let Christians perish. Put
us up where you like, and if we eat up your provisions,
or do any other damage, may our hands
wither up, and all the punishment of heaven light
on us!&rdquo;</p>

<p>The old woman seemed a little touched.
&ldquo;Well,&rdquo; she said after a few moments' consideration,
&ldquo;I will let you in; but I must put you
in different rooms, for I should have no quiet if
you were all together at night.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Do just as you like; we won't say any more
about it,&rdquo; answered the students.</p>

<p>The gates moved heavily on their hinges, and
they entered the court-yard.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Well now, mother,&rdquo; said the philosopher,
following the old woman, &ldquo;if you had a little
scrap of something! By heavens! my stomach

is as empty as a drum. I have not had a bit of
bread in my mouth since early this morning!&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Didn't I say so?&rdquo; replied the old woman.
&ldquo;There you go begging at once. But I have no
food in the house, nor any fire.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;But we will pay for everything,&rdquo; continued
the philosopher.</p>

<p>&ldquo;We will pay early to-morrow in cash.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Go on and be content with what you get.
You are fine fellows whom the devil has brought
here!&rdquo;</p>

<p>Her reply greatly depressed the philosopher
Thomas; but suddenly his nose caught the odour
of dried fish; he looked at the breeches of the
theologian, who walked by his side, and saw a
huge fish's tail sticking out of his pocket. The
latter had already seized the opportunity to steal
a whole fish from one of the carts standing in the
court-yard. He had not done this from hunger
so much as from the force of habit. He had
quite forgotten the fish, and was looking about
to see whether he could not find something else
to appropriate. Then the philosopher put his
hand in the theologian's pocket as though it were
his own, and laid hold of his prize.</p>

<p>The old woman found a special resting-place
for each student; the rhetorician she put in a
shed, the theologian in an empty store-room, and
the philosopher in a sheep's stall.</p>

<p>As soon as the philosopher was alone, he

devoured the fish in a twinkling, examined the
fence which enclosed the stall, kicked away a
pig from a neighbouring stall, which had inquiringly
inserted its nose through a crevice,
and lay down on his right side to sleep like a
corpse.</p>

<p>Then the low door opened, and the old woman
came crouching into the stall.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Well, mother, what do you want here?&rdquo;
asked the philosopher.</p>

<p>She made no answer, but came with outstretched
arms towards him.</p>

<p>The philosopher shrank back; but she still
approached, as though she wished to lay hold of
him. A terrible fright seized him, for he saw
the old hag's eyes sparkle in an extraordinary
way. &ldquo;Away with you, old witch, away with
you!&rdquo; he shouted. But she still stretched her
hands after him.</p>

<p>He jumped up in order to rush out, but she
placed herself before the door, fixed her glowing
eyes upon him, and again approached him. The
philosopher tried to push her away with his
hands, but to his astonishment he found that he
could neither lift his hands nor move his legs,
nor utter an audible word. He only heard his
heart beating, and saw the old woman approach
him, place his hands crosswise on his breast, and
bend his head down. Then with the agility of
a cat she sprang on his shoulders, struck him on

the side with a broom, and he began to run like
a race-horse, carrying her on his shoulders.</p>

<p>All this happened with such swiftness, that the
philosopher could scarcely collect his thoughts.
He laid hold of his knees with both hands in
order to stop his legs from running; but to his
great astonishment they kept moving forward
against his will, making rapid springs like a
Caucasian horse.</p>

<p>Not till the house had been left behind them
and a wide plain stretched before them, bordered
on one side by a black gloomy wood, did he say
to himself, &ldquo;Ah! it is a witch!&rdquo;</p>

<p>The half-moon shone pale and high in the sky.
Its mild light, still more subdued by intervening
clouds, fell like a transparent veil on the earth.
Woods, meadows, hills, and valleys&mdash;all seemed
to be sleeping with open eyes; nowhere was a
breath of air stirring. The atmosphere was moist
and warm; the shadows of the trees and bushes
fell sharply defined on the sloping plain. Such
was the night through which the philosopher
Thomas Brutus sped with his strange rider.</p>

<p>A strange, oppressive, and yet sweet sensation
took possession of his heart. He looked
down and saw how the grass beneath his feet
seemed to be quite deep and far away; over it
there flowed a flood of crystal-clear water, and
the grassy plain looked like the bottom of a transparent
sea. He saw his own image, and that

of the old woman whom he carried on his back,
clearly reflected in it. Then he beheld how,
instead of the moon, a strange sun shone there;
he heard the deep tones of bells, and saw them
swinging. He saw a water-nixie rise from a bed
of tall reeds; she turned to him, and her face
was clearly visible, and she sang a song which
penetrated his soul; then she approached him
and nearly reached the surface of the water, on
which she burst into laughter and again disappeared.</p>

<p>Did he see it or did he not see it? Was he
dreaming or was he awake? But what was that
below&mdash;wind or music? It sounded and drew
nearer, and penetrated his soul like a song that
rose and fell. &ldquo;What is it?&rdquo; he thought as he
gazed into the depths, and still sped rapidly along.</p>

<p>The perspiration flowed from him in streams;
he experienced simultaneously a strange feeling
of oppression and delight in all his being. Often
he felt as though he had no longer a heart, and
pressed his hand on his breast with alarm.</p>

<p>Weary to death, he began to repeat all the
prayers which he knew, and all the formulas
of exorcism against evil spirits. Suddenly he
experienced a certain relief. He felt that his
pace was slackening; the witch weighed less
heavily on his shoulders, and the thick herbage
of the plain was again beneath his feet, with
nothing especial to remark about it.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Splendid!&rdquo; thought the philosopher
Thomas, and began to repeat his exorcisms in a
still louder voice.</p>

<p>Then suddenly he wrenched himself away from
under the witch, and sprang on her back in his
turn. She began to run, with short, trembling
steps indeed, but so rapidly that he could hardly
breathe. So swiftly did she run that she hardly
seemed to touch the ground. They were still on
the plain, but owing to the rapidity of their
flight everything seemed indistinct and confused
before his eyes. He seized a stick that was
lying on the ground, and began to belabour the
hag with all his might. She uttered a wild cry,
which at first sounded raging and threatening;
then it became gradually weaker and more
gentle, till at last it sounded quite low like the
pleasant tones of a silver bell, so that it penetrated
his innermost soul. Involuntarily the
thought passed through his mind:</p>

<p>&ldquo;Is she really an old woman?&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Ah! I can go no farther,&rdquo; she said in a
faint voice, and sank to the earth.</p>

<p>He knelt beside her, and looked in her eyes.
The dawn was red in the sky, and in the distance
glimmered the gilt domes of the churches of Kieff.
Before him lay a beautiful maiden with thick,
dishevelled hair and long eyelashes. Unconsciously
she had stretched out her white, bare
arms, and her tear-filled eyes gazed at the sky.</p>

<p>Thomas trembled like an aspen-leaf. Sympathy,
and a strange feeling of excitement, and a
hitherto unknown fear overpowered him. He
began to run with all his might. His heart beat
violently, and he could not explain to himself
what a strange, new feeling had seized him. He
did not wish to return to the village, but hastened
towards Kieff, thinking all the way as he went
of his weird, unaccountable adventure.</p>

<p>There were hardly any students left in the
town; they were all scattered about the country,
and had either taken tutors' posts or simply lived
without occupation; for at the farms in Little
Russia one can live comfortably and at ease without
paying a farthing. The great half-decayed
building in which the seminary was established
was completely empty; and however much the
philosopher searched in all its corners for a piece
of lard and bread, he could not find even one
of the hard biscuits which the seminarists were in
the habit of hiding.</p>

<p>But the philosopher found a means of extricating
himself from his difficulties by making
friends with a certain young widow in the market-place
who sold ribbons, etc. The same evening
he found himself being stuffed with cakes and
fowl; in fact it is impossible to say how many
things were placed before him on a little table
in an arbour shaded by cherry-trees.</p>

<p>Later on the same evening the philosopher was

to be seen in an ale-house. He lay on a bench,
smoked his pipe in his usual way, and threw the
Jewish publican a gold piece. He had a jug of
ale standing before him, looked on all who went
in and out in a cold-blooded, self-satisfied way,
and thought no more of his strange adventure.</p>

<p class="dot-break">. . . . . .</p>

<p>About this time a report spread about that the
daughter of a rich colonel, whose estate lay about
fifty versts distant from Kieff, had returned home
one day from a walk in a quite broken-down condition.
She had scarcely enough strength to
reach her father's house; now she lay dying, and
had expressed a wish that for three days after
her death the prayers for the dead should be
recited by a Kieff seminarist named Thomas
Brutus.</p>

<p>This fact was communicated to the philosopher
by the rector of the seminary himself, who sent
for him to his room and told him that he must
start at once, as a rich colonel had sent his
servants and a kibitka for him. The philosopher
trembled, and was seized by an uncomfortable
feeling which he could not define. He had a
gloomy foreboding that some evil was about to
befall him. Without knowing why, he declared
that he did not wish to go.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Listen, Thomas,&rdquo; said the rector, who
under certain circumstances spoke very politely

to his pupils; &ldquo;I have no idea of asking you
whether you wish to go or not. I only tell you
that if you think of disobeying, I will have you
so soundly flogged on the back with young birch-rods,
that you need not think of having a bath
for a long time.&rdquo;</p>

<p>The philosopher scratched the back of his
head, and went out silently, intending to make
himself scarce at the first opportunity. Lost in
thought, he descended the steep flight of steps
which led to the court-yard, thickly planted
with poplars; there he remained standing for a
moment, and heard quite distinctly the rector
giving orders in a loud voice to his steward,
and to another person, probably one of the
messengers sent by the colonel.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Thank your master for the peeled barley and
the eggs,&rdquo; said the rector; &ldquo;and tell him that
as soon as the books which he mentions in his
note are ready, I will send them. I have already
given them to a clerk to be copied. And don't
forget to remind your master that he has some
excellent fish, especially prime sturgeon, in his
ponds; he might send me some when he has the
opportunity, as here in the market the fish
are bad and dear. And you, Jantukh, give the
colonel's man a glass of brandy. And mind you
tie up the philosopher, or he will show you a
clean pair of heels.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Listen to the scoundrel!&rdquo; thought the

philosopher. &ldquo;He has smelt a rat, the long-legged
stork!&rdquo;</p>

<p>He descended into the court-yard and beheld
there a kibitka, which he at first took for a barn
on wheels. It was, in fact, as roomy as a kiln,
so that bricks might have been made inside it.
It was one of those remarkable Cracow vehicles
in which Jews travelled from town to town in
scores, wherever they thought they would find a
market. Six stout, strong, though somewhat
elderly Cossacks were standing by it. Their
gold-braided coats of fine cloth showed that
their master was rich and of some importance;
and certain little scars testified to their valour
on the battle-field.</p>

<p>&ldquo;What can I do?&rdquo; thought the philosopher.
&ldquo;There is no escaping one's destiny.&rdquo; So he
stepped up to the Cossacks and said &ldquo;Good day,
comrades.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Welcome, Mr Philosopher!&rdquo; some of them
answered.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Well, I am to travel with you! It is a
magnificent vehicle,&rdquo; he continued as he got
into it. &ldquo;If there were only musicians present,
one might dance in it.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Yes, it is a roomy carriage,&rdquo; said one of the
Cossacks, taking his seat by the coachman. The
latter had tied a cloth round his head, as he had
already found an opportunity of pawning his cap
in the ale-house. The other five, with the

philosopher, got into the capacious kibitka, and
sat upon sacks which were filled with all sorts
of articles purchased in the city.</p>

<p>&ldquo;I should like to know,&rdquo; said the philosopher,
&ldquo;if this equipage were laden with salt or iron,
how many horses would be required to draw it?&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Yes,&rdquo; said the Cossack who sat by the
coachman, after thinking a short time, &ldquo;it would
require a good many horses.&rdquo;</p>

<p>After giving this satisfactory answer, the
Cossack considered himself entitled to remain
silent for the whole of the rest of the journey.</p>

<p>The philosopher would gladly have found out
who the colonel was, and what sort of a character
he had. He was also curious to know about his
daughter, who had returned home in such a
strange way and now lay dying, and whose
destiny seemed to be mingled with his own;
and wanted to know the sort of life that was
lived in the colonel's house. But the Cossacks
were probably philosophers like himself, for in
answer to his inquiries they only blew clouds of
tobacco and settled themselves more comfortably
on their sacks.</p>

<p>Meanwhile, one of them addressed to the
coachman on the box a brief command: &ldquo;Keep
your eyes open, Overko, you old sleepy-head, and
when you come to the ale-house on the road to
Tchukrailoff, don't forget to pull up and wake me
and the other fellows if we are asleep.&rdquo; Then

he began to snore pretty loud. But in any
case his admonition was quite superfluous; for
scarcely had the enormous equipage begun to
approach the aforesaid ale-house, than they all
cried with one mouth &ldquo;Halt! Halt!&rdquo; Besides
this, Overko's horse was accustomed to stop outside
every inn of its own accord.</p>

<p>In spite of the intense July heat, they all got
out and entered a low, dirty room where a Jewish
innkeeper received them in a friendly way as old
acquaintances. He brought in the skirt of his
long coat some sausages, and laid them on the
table, where, though forbidden by the Talmud,
they looked very seductive. All sat down at
table, and it was not long before each of the
guests had an earthenware jug standing in front
of him. The philosopher Thomas had to take
part in the feast, and as the Little Russians when
they are intoxicated always begin to kiss each
other or to weep, the whole room soon began to
echo with demonstrations of affection.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Come here, come here, Spirid, let me
embrace thee!&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Come here, Dorosch, let me press you to my
heart!&rdquo;</p>

<p>One Cossack, with a grey moustache, the
eldest of them all, leant his head on his hand
and began to weep bitterly because he was an
orphan and alone in God's wide world. Another
tall, loquacious man did his best to comfort him,

saying, &ldquo;Don't weep, for God's sake, don't
weep! For over there&mdash;God knows best.&rdquo;</p>

<p>The Cossack who had been addressed as
Dorosch was full of curiosity, and addressed
many questions to the philosopher Thomas. &ldquo;I
should like to know,&rdquo; he said, &ldquo;what you learn
in your seminary; do you learn the same things
as the deacon reads to us in church, or something
else?&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Don't ask,&rdquo; said the consoler; &ldquo;let them
learn what they like. God knows what is to
happen; God knows everything.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;No, I will know,&rdquo; answered Dorosch, &ldquo;I
will know what is written in their books; perhaps
it is something quite different from that in the
deacon's book.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;O good heavens!&rdquo; said the other, &ldquo;why all
this talk? It is God's will, and one cannot
change God's arrangements.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;But I will know everything that is written;
I will enter the seminary too, by heaven I will!
Do you think perhaps I could not learn? I will
learn everything, everything.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Oh, heavens!&rdquo; exclaimed the consoler, and
let his head sink on the table, for he could no
longer hold it upright.</p>

<p>The other Cossacks talked about the nobility,
and why there was a moon in the sky.</p>

<p>When the philosopher Thomas saw the state
they were in, he determined to profit by it, and

to make his escape. In the first place he turned
to the grey-headed Cossack, who was lamenting
the loss of his parents. &ldquo;But, little uncle,&rdquo; he
said to him, &ldquo;why do you weep so? I too am
an orphan! Let me go, children; why do you
want me?&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Let him go!&rdquo; said some of them, &ldquo;he is
an orphan, let him go where he likes.&rdquo;</p>

<p>They were about to take him outside themselves,
when the one who had displayed a special
thirst for knowledge, stopped them, saying, &ldquo;No,
I want to talk with him about the seminary; I am
going to the seminary myself.&rdquo;</p>

<p>Moreover, it was not yet certain whether the
philosopher could have executed his project of
flight, for when he tried to rise from his chair,
he felt as though his feet were made of wood,
and he began to see such a number of doors leading
out of the room that it would have been
difficult for him to have found the right one.</p>

<p>It was not till evening that the company remembered
that they must continue their journey.
They crowded into the kibitka, whipped up the
horses, and struck up a song, the words and sense
of which were hard to understand. During a
great part of the night, they wandered about,
having lost the road which they ought to have
been able to find blindfolded. At last they drove
down a steep descent into a valley, and the
philosopher noticed, by the sides of the road,

hedges, behind which he caught glimpses of
small trees and house-roofs. All these belonged
to the colonel's estate.</p>

<p>It was already long past midnight. The sky
was dark, though little stars glimmered here
and there; no light was to be seen in any of
the houses. They drove into a large court-yard,
while the dogs barked. On all sides were barns
and cottages with thatched roofs. Just opposite
the gateway was a house, which was larger than
the others, and seemed to be the colonel's dwelling.
The kibitka stopped before a small barn,
and the travellers hastened into it and laid
themselves down to sleep. The philosopher however
attempted to look at the exterior of the
house, but, rub his eyes as he might, he could
distinguish nothing; the house seemed to turn
into a bear, and the chimney into the rector of
the seminary. Then he gave it up and lay down
to sleep.</p>

<p>When he woke up the next morning, the whole
house was in commotion; the young lady had
died during the night. The servants ran hither
and thither in a distracted state; the old women
wept and lamented; and a number of curious
people gazed through the enclosure into the
court-yard, as though there were something
special to be seen. The philosopher began now
to inspect the locality and the buildings, which
he had not been able to do during the night.</p>

<p>The colonel's house was one of those low,
small buildings, such as used formerly to be constructed
in Russia. It was thatched with straw;
a small, high-peaked gable, with a window
shaped like an eye, was painted all over with
blue and yellow flowers and red crescent-moons;
it rested on little oaken pillars, which were round
above the middle, hexagonal below, and whose
capitals were adorned with quaint carvings.
Under this gable was a small staircase with seats
at the foot of it on either side.</p>

<p>The walls of the house were supported by
similar pillars. Before the house stood a large
pear-tree of pyramidal shape, whose leaves incessantly
trembled. A double row of buildings
formed a broad street leading up to the colonel's
house. Behind the barns near the entrance-gate
stood two three-cornered wine-houses, also
thatched with straw; each of the stone walls had
a door in it, and was covered with all kinds of
paintings. On one was represented a Cossack
sitting on a barrel and swinging a large pitcher
over his head; it bore the inscription &ldquo;I will
drink all that!&rdquo; Elsewhere were painted large
and small bottles, a beautiful girl, a running
horse, a pipe, and a drum bearing the words
&ldquo;Wine is the Cossack's joy.&rdquo;</p>

<p>In the loft of one of the barns one saw through
a huge round window a drum and some trumpets.
At the gate there stood two cannons. All this

showed that the colonel loved a cheerful life, and
the whole place often rang with sounds of merriment.
Before the gate were two windmills, and
behind the house gardens sloped away; through
the tree-tops the dark chimneys of the peasants'
houses were visible. The whole village lay on a
broad, even plateau, in the middle of a mountain-slope
which culminated in a steep summit on
the north side. When seen from below, it
looked still steeper. Here and there on the top
the irregular stems of the thick steppe-brooms
showed in dark relief against the blue sky. The
bare clay soil made a melancholy impression,
worn as it was into deep furrows by rain-water.
On the same slope there stood two cottages, and
over one of them a huge apple-tree spread its
branches; the roots were supported by small
props, whose interstices were filled with mould.
The apples, which were blown off by the wind,
rolled down to the court-yard below. A road
wound round the mountain to the village.</p>

<p>When the philosopher looked at this steep
slope, and remembered his journey of the night
before, he came to the conclusion that either the
colonel's horses were very sagacious, or that the
Cossacks must have very strong heads, as they
ventured, even when the worse for drink, on
such a road with the huge kibitka.</p>

<p>When the philosopher turned and looked in
the opposite direction, he saw quite another

picture. The village reached down to the plain;
meadows stretched away to an immense distance,
their bright green growing gradually dark; far
away, about twenty versts off, many other villages
were visible. To the right of these meadows
were chains of hills, and in the remote distance
one saw the Dnieper shimmer and sparkle like a
mirror of steel.</p>

<p>&ldquo;What a splendid country!&rdquo; said the
philosopher to himself. &ldquo;It must be fine to live
here! One could catch fish in the Dnieper, and
in the ponds, and shoot and snare partridges and
bustards; there must be quantities here. Much
fruit might be dried here and sold in the town,
or, better still, brandy might be distilled from it,
for fruit-brandy is the best of all. But what prevents
me thinking of my escape after all?&rdquo;</p>

<p>Behind the hedge he saw a little path which
was almost entirely concealed by the high grass
of the steppe. The philosopher approached it
mechanically, meaning at first to walk a little
along it unobserved, and then quite quietly to
gain the open country behind the peasants'
houses. Suddenly he felt the pressure of a fairly
heavy hand on his shoulder.</p>

<p>Behind him stood the same old Cossack who
yesterday had so bitterly lamented the death of
his father and mother, and his own loneliness.
&ldquo;You are giving yourself useless trouble, Mr
Philosopher, if you think you can escape from

us,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;One cannot run away here; and
besides, the roads are too bad for walkers. Come
to the colonel; he has been waiting for you for
some time in his room.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Yes, of course! What are you talking
about? I will come with the greatest pleasure,&rdquo;
said the philosopher, and followed the Cossack.</p>

<p>The colonel was an elderly man; his moustache
was grey, and his face wore the signs of deep sadness.
He sat in his room by a table, with his
head propped on both hands. He seemed about
five-and-fifty, but his attitude of utter despair,
and the pallor on his face, showed that his heart
had been suddenly broken, and that all his former
cheerfulness had for ever disappeared.</p>

<p>When Thomas entered with the Cossack, he
answered their deep bows with a slight inclination
of the head.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Who are you, whence do you come, and
what is your profession, my good man?&rdquo; asked
the colonel in an even voice, neither friendly nor
austere.</p>

<p>&ldquo;I am a student of philosophy; my name is
Thomas Brutus.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;And who was your father?&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;I don't know, sir.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;And your mother?&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;I don't know either; I know that I must have
had a mother, but who she was, and where she
lived, by heavens, I do not know.&rdquo;</p>

<p>The colonel was silent, and seemed for a
moment lost in thought. &ldquo;Where did you come
to know my daughter?&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;I do not know her, gracious sir; I declare I
do not know her.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Why then has she chosen you, and no one
else, to offer up prayers for her?&rdquo;</p>

<p>The philosopher shrugged his shoulders.
&ldquo;God only knows. It is a well-known fact that
grand people often demand things which the
most learned man cannot comprehend; and does
not the proverb say, &lsquo;Dance, devil, as the Lord
commands!&rsquo;&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Aren't you talking nonsense, Mr Philosopher?&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;May the lightning strike me on the spot if
I lie.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;If she had only lived a moment longer,&rdquo;
said the colonel sadly, &ldquo;then I had certainly
found out everything. She said, &lsquo;Let no one
offer up prayers for me, but send, father, at once
to the seminary in Kieff for the student Thomas
Brutus; he shall pray three nights running for
my sinful soul&mdash;he knows.&rsquo; But what he really
knows she never said. The poor dove could
speak no more, and died. Good man, you are
probably well known for your sanctity and
devout life, and she has perhaps heard of you.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;What? Of me?&rdquo; said the philosopher, and
took a step backward in amazement. &ldquo;I and

sanctity!&rdquo; he exclaimed, and stared at the
colonel. &ldquo;God help us, gracious sir! What
are you saying? It was only last Holy Thursday
that I paid a visit to the tart-shop.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Well, she must at any rate have had some
reason for making the arrangement, and you
must begin your duties to-day.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;I should like to remark to your honour&mdash;naturally
everyone who knows the Holy Scripture
at all can in his measure&mdash;but I believe it would
be better on this occasion to send for a deacon
or subdeacon. They are learned people, and
they know exactly what is to be done. I have
not got a good voice, nor any official standing.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;You may say what you like, but I shall carry
out all my dove's wishes. If you read the prayers
for her three nights through in the proper way, I
will reward you; and if not&mdash;I advise the devil
himself not to oppose me!&rdquo;</p>

<p>The colonel spoke the last words in such an
emphatic way that the philosopher quite understood
them.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Follow me!&rdquo; said the colonel.</p>

<p>They went into the hall. The colonel opened
a door which was opposite his own. The
philosopher remained for a few minutes in the
hall in order to look about him; then he stepped
over the threshold with a certain nervousness.</p>

<p>The whole floor of the room was covered with
red cloth. In a corner under the icons of the

saints, on a table covered with a gold-bordered,
velvet cloth, lay the body of the girl. Tall
candles, round which were wound branches of
the &ldquo;calina,&rdquo; stood at her head and feet, and
burned dimly in the broad daylight. The face
of the dead was not to be seen, as the inconsolable
father sat before his daughter, with his
back turned to the philosopher. The words
which the latter overheard filled him with a
certain fear:</p>

<p>&ldquo;I do not mourn, my daughter, that in the
flower of your age you have prematurely left the
earth, to my grief; but I mourn, my dove, that
I do not know my deadly enemy who caused your
death. Had I only known that anyone could
even conceive the idea of insulting you, or of
speaking a disrespectful word to you, I swear by
heaven he would never have seen his children
again, if he had been as old as myself; nor his
father and mother, if he had been young. And I
would have thrown his corpse to the birds of the
air, and the wild beasts of the steppe. But woe
is me, my flower, my dove, my light! I will spend
the remainder of my life without joy, and wipe
the bitter tears which flow out of my old eyes,
while my enemy will rejoice and laugh in secret
over the helpless old man!&rdquo;</p>

<p>He paused, overpowered by grief, and streams
of tears flowed down his cheeks.</p>

<p>The philosopher was deeply affected by the

sight of such inconsolable sorrow. He coughed
gently in order to clear his throat. The colonel
turned and signed to him to take his place at the
head of the dead girl, before a little prayer-desk
on which some books lay.</p>

<p>&ldquo;I can manage to hold out for three nights,&rdquo;
thought the philosopher; &ldquo;and then the colonel
will fill both my pockets with ducats.&rdquo;</p>

<p>He approached the dead girl, and after coughing
once more, began to read, without paying
attention to anything else, and firmly resolved
not to look at her face.</p>

<p>Soon there was deep silence, and he saw that
the colonel had left the room. Slowly he turned
his head in order to look at the corpse. A
violent shudder thrilled through him; before him
lay a form of such beauty as is seldom seen
upon earth. It seemed to him that never in a
single face had so much intensity of expression
and harmony of feature been united. Her brow,
soft as snow and pure as silver, seemed to be
thinking; the fine, regular eyebrows shadowed
proudly the closed eyes, whose lashes gently
rested on her cheeks, which seemed to glow with
secret longing; her lips still appeared to smile.
But at the same time he saw something in these
features which appalled him; a terrible depression
seized his heart, as when in the midst of
dance and song someone begins to chant a dirge.
He felt as though those ruby lips were coloured

with his own heart's blood. Moreover, her face
seemed dreadfully familiar.</p>

<p>&ldquo;The witch!&rdquo; he cried out in a voice which
sounded strange to himself; then he turned away
and began to read the prayers with white cheeks.
It was the witch whom he had killed.</p>

<h3>II</h3>

<p>When the sun had sunk below the horizon,
the corpse was carried into the church. The
philosopher supported one corner of the black-draped
coffin upon his shoulder, and felt an ice-cold
shiver run through his body. The colonel
walked in front of him, with his right hand
resting on the edge of the coffin.</p>

<p>The wooden church, black with age and
overgrown with green lichen, stood quite at the
end of the village in gloomy solitude; it was
adorned with three round cupolas. One saw at
the first glance that it had not been used for
divine worship for a long time.</p>

<p>Lighted candles were standing before almost
every icon. The coffin was set down before the
altar. The old colonel kissed his dead daughter
once more, and then left the church, together
with the bearers of the bier, after he had ordered
his servants to look after the philosopher and to
take him back to the church after supper.</p>

<p>The coffin-bearers, when they returned to the

house, all laid their hands on the stove. This
custom is always observed in Little Russia by
those who have seen a corpse.</p>

<p>The hunger which the philosopher now began
to feel caused him for a while to forget the dead
girl altogether. Gradually all the domestics of
the house assembled in the kitchen; it was really
a kind of club, where they were accustomed to
gather. Even the dogs came to the door, wagging
their tails in order to have bones and offal
thrown to them.</p>

<p>If a servant was sent on an errand, he always
found his way into the kitchen to rest there for
a while, and to smoke a pipe. All the Cossacks
of the establishment lay here during the whole
day on and under the benches&mdash;in fact, wherever
a place could be found to lie down in. Moreover,
everyone was always leaving something
behind in the kitchen&mdash;his cap, or his whip, or
something of the sort. But the numbers of the
club were not complete till the evening, when
the groom came in after tying up his horses in
the stable, the cowherd had shut up his cows
in their stalls, and others collected there who
were not usually seen in the day-time. During
supper-time even the tongues of the laziest were
set in motion. They talked of all and everything&mdash;of
the new pair of breeches which someone
had ordered for himself, of what might be
in the centre of the earth, and of the wolf which

someone had seen. There were a number of
wits in the company&mdash;a class which is always
represented in Little Russia.</p>

<p>The philosopher took his place with the rest in
the great circle which sat round the kitchen door
in the open-air. Soon an old woman with a red
cap issued from it, bearing with both hands a
large vessel full of hot &ldquo;galuchkis,&rdquo; which she
distributed among them. Each drew out of
his pocket a wooden spoon, or a one-pronged
wooden fork. As soon as their jaws began to
move a little more slowly, and their wolfish
hunger was somewhat appeased, they began to
talk. The conversation, as might be expected,
turned on the dead girl.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Is it true,&rdquo; said a young shepherd, &ldquo;is it
true&mdash;though I cannot understand it&mdash;that our
young mistress had traffic with evil spirits?&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Who, the young lady?&rdquo; answered Dorosch,
whose acquaintance the philosopher had already
made in the kibitka. &ldquo;Yes, she was a regular
witch! I can swear that she was a witch!&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Hold your tongue, Dorosch!&rdquo; exclaimed
another&mdash;the one who, during the journey, had
played the part of a consoler. &ldquo;We have
nothing to do with that. May God be merciful
to her! One ought not to talk of such things.&rdquo;</p>

<p>But Dorosch was not at all inclined to be
silent; he had just visited the wine-cellar with
the steward on important business, and having

stooped two or three times over one or two casks,
he had returned in a very cheerful and loquacious
mood.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Why do you ask me to be silent?&rdquo; he
answered. &ldquo;She has ridden on my own shoulders,
I swear she has.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Say, uncle,&rdquo; asked the young shepherd,
&ldquo;are there signs by which to recognise a
sorceress?&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;No, there are not,&rdquo; answered Dorosch;
&ldquo;even if you knew the Psalter by heart, you
could not recognise one.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Yes, Dorosch, it is possible; don't talk such
nonsense,&rdquo; retorted the former consoler. &ldquo;It
is not for nothing that God has given each some
special peculiarity; the learned maintain that
every witch has a little tail.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Every old woman is a witch,&rdquo; said a grey-headed
Cossack quite seriously.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Yes, you are a fine lot,&rdquo; retorted the old
woman who entered at that moment with a vessel
full of fresh &ldquo;galuchkis.&rdquo; &ldquo;You are great fat
pigs!&rdquo;</p>

<p>A self-satisfied smile played round the lips of
the old Cossack whose name was Javtuch, when
he found that his remark had touched the old
woman on a tender point. The shepherd burst
into such a deep and loud explosion of laughter
as if two oxen were lowing together.</p>

<p>This conversation excited in the philosopher

a great curiosity, and a wish to obtain more
exact information regarding the colonel's
daughter. In order to lead the talk back to the
subject, he turned to his next neighbour and
said, &ldquo;I should like to know why all the people
here think that the young lady was a witch.
Has she done harm to anyone, or killed them by
witchcraft?&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Yes, there are reports of that kind,&rdquo;
answered a man, whose face was as flat as a
shovel. &ldquo;Who does not remember the huntsman
Mikita, or the<span style="white-space: nowrap;">&mdash;&mdash;</span>&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;What has the huntsman Mikita got to do
with it?&rdquo; asked the philosopher.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Stop; I will tell you the story of Mikita,&rdquo;
interrupted Dorosch.</p>

<p>&ldquo;No, I will tell it,&rdquo; said the groom, &ldquo;for he
was my godfather.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;I will tell the story of Mikita,&rdquo; said Spirid.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Yes, yes, Spirid shall tell it,&rdquo; exclaimed the
whole company; and Spirid began.</p>

<p>&ldquo;You, Mr Philosopher Thomas, did not know
Mikita. Ah! he was an extraordinary man.
He knew every dog as though he were his own
father. The present huntsman, Mikola, who sits
three places away from me, is not fit to hold a
candle to him, though good enough in his way;
but compared to Mikita, he is a mere milksop.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;You tell the tale splendidly,&rdquo; exclaimed
Dorosch, and nodded as a sign of approval.</p>

<p>Spirid continued.</p>

<p>&ldquo;He saw a hare in the field quicker than
you can take a pinch of snuff. He only needed
to whistle &lsquo;Come here, Rasboy! Come here,
Bosdraja!&rsquo; and flew away on his horse like the
wind, so that you could not say whether he went
quicker than the dog or the dog than he. He
could empty a quart pot of brandy in the twinkling
of an eye. Ah! he was a splendid huntsman,
only for some time he always had his eyes
fixed on the young lady. Either he had fallen
in love with her or she had bewitched him&mdash;in
short, he went to the dogs. He became a regular
old woman; yes, he became the devil knows what&mdash;it
is not fitting to relate it.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Very good,&rdquo; remarked Dorosch.</p>

<p>&ldquo;If the young lady only looked at him, he let
the reins slip out of his hands, called Bravko
instead of Rasboy, stumbled, and made all kinds
of mistakes. One day when he was currycombing
a horse, the young lady came to him in the
stable. &lsquo;Listen, Mikita,&rsquo; she said. &lsquo;I should
like for once to set my foot on you.&rsquo; And he,
the booby, was quite delighted, and answered,
&lsquo;Don't only set your foot there, but sit on me
altogether.&rsquo; The young lady lifted her white
little foot, and as soon as he saw it, his delight
robbed him of his senses. He bowed his neck,
the idiot, took her feet in both hands, and began
to trot about like a horse all over the place.

Whither they went he could not say; he returned
more dead than alive, and from that time he
wasted away and became as dry as a chip of
wood. At last someone coming into the stable
one day found instead of him only a handful
of ashes and an empty jug; he had burned
completely out. But it must be said he
was a huntsman such as the world cannot
match.&rdquo;</p>

<p>When Spirid had ended his tale, they all began
to vie with one another in praising the deceased
huntsman.</p>

<p>&ldquo;And have you heard the story of Cheptchicha?&rdquo;
asked Dorosch, turning to Thomas.</p>

<p>&ldquo;No.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Ha! Ha! One sees they don't teach you
much in your seminary. Well, listen. We
have here in our village a Cossack called Cheptoun,
a fine fellow. Sometimes indeed he
amuses himself by stealing and lying without any
reason; but he is a fine fellow for all that. His
house is not far away from here. One evening,
just about this time, Cheptoun and his wife went
to bed after they had finished their day's work.
Since it was fine weather, Cheptchicha went to
sleep in the court-yard, and Cheptoun in the
house&mdash;no! I mean Cheptchicha went to sleep
in the house on a bench and Cheptoun outside<span style="white-space: nowrap;">&mdash;&mdash;</span>&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;No, Cheptchicha didn't go to sleep on a

bench, but on the ground,&rdquo; interrupted the old
woman who stood at the door.</p>

<p>Dorosch looked at her, then at the ground,
then again at her, and said after a pause, &ldquo;If I
tore your dress off your back before all these
people, it wouldn't look pretty.&rdquo;</p>

<p>The rebuke was effectual. The old woman
was silent, and did not interrupt again.</p>

<p>Dorosch continued.</p>

<p>&ldquo;In the cradle which hung in the middle of the
room lay a one-year-old child. I do not know
whether it was a boy or a girl. Cheptchicha had
lain down, and heard on the other side of the
door a dog scratching and howling loud enough
to frighten anyone. She was afraid, for women
are such simple folk that if one puts out one's
tongue at them behind the door in the dark, their
hearts sink into their boots. &lsquo;But,&rsquo; she thought
to herself, &lsquo;I must give this cursed dog one on
the snout to stop his howling!&rsquo; So she seized
the poker and opened the door. But hardly had
she done so than the dog rushed between her
legs straight to the cradle. Then Cheptchicha
saw that it was not a dog but the young lady;
and if it had only been the young lady as she
knew her it wouldn't have mattered, but she
looked quite blue, and her eyes sparkled like fiery
coals. She seized the child, bit its throat, and
began to suck its blood. Cheptchicha shrieked,
&lsquo;Ah! my darling child!&rsquo; and rushed out of the

room. Then she saw that the house-door was
shut and rushed up to the attic and sat there, the
stupid woman, trembling all over. Then the
young lady came after her and bit her too, poor
fool! The next morning Cheptoun carried his
wife, all bitten and wounded, down from the
attic, and the next day she died. Such strange
things happen in the world. One may wear fine
clothes, but that does not matter; a witch is and
remains a witch.&rdquo;</p>

<p>After telling his story, Dorosch looked around
him with a complacent air, and cleaned out his
pipe with his little finger in order to fill it again.
The story of the witch had made a deep impression
on all, and each of them had something to
say about her. One had seen her come to the
door of his house in the form of a hayrick; from
others she had stolen their caps or their pipes;
she had cut off the hair-plaits of many girls in
the village, and drunk whole pints of the blood
of others.</p>

<p>At last the whole company observed that they
had gossiped over their time, for it was already
night. All looked for a sleeping place&mdash;some
in the kitchen and others in the barn or the
court-yard.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Now, Mr Thomas, it is time that we go
to the dead,&rdquo; said the grey-headed Cossack,
turning to the philosopher. All four&mdash;Spirid,
Dorosch, the old Cossack, and the philosopher&mdash;betook

themselves to the church, keeping off with
their whips the wild dogs who roamed about the
roads in great numbers and bit the sticks of
passers-by in sheer malice.</p>

<p>Although the philosopher had seized the opportunity
of fortifying himself beforehand with a
stiff glass of brandy, yet he felt a certain secret
fear which increased as he approached the
church, which was lit up within. The strange
tales he had heard had made a deep impression
on his imagination. They had passed the thick
hedges and trees, and the country became more
open. At last they reached the small enclosure
round the church; behind it there were no more
trees, but a huge, empty plain dimly visible in
the darkness. The three Cossacks ascended the
steep steps with Thomas, and entered the church.
Here they left the philosopher, expressing their
hope that he would successfully accomplish his
duties, and locked him in as their master had
ordered.</p>

<p>He was left alone. At first he yawned, then
he stretched himself, blew on both hands, and
finally looked round him. In the middle of the
church stood the black bier; before the dark
pictures of saints burned the candles, whose
light only illuminated the icons, and cast a faint
glimmer into the body of the church; all the
corners were in complete darkness. The lofty
icons seemed to be of considerable age; only a

little of the original gilt remained on their broken
traceries; the faces of the saints had become
quite black and looked uncanny.</p>

<p>Once more the philosopher cast a glance
around him. &ldquo;Bother it!&rdquo; said he to himself.
&ldquo;What is there to be afraid about? No living
creature can get in, and as for the dead and
those who come from the &lsquo;other side,&rsquo; I can
protect myself with such effectual prayers that
they cannot touch me with the tips of their
fingers. There is nothing to fear,&rdquo; he repeated,
swinging his arms. &ldquo;Let us begin the
prayers!&rdquo;</p>

<p>As he approached one of the side-aisles, he
noticed two packets of candles which had been
placed there.</p>

<p>&ldquo;That is fine,&rdquo; he thought. &ldquo;I must
illuminate the whole church, till it is as bright
as day. What a pity that one cannot smoke
in it.&rdquo;</p>

<p>He began to light the candles on all the wall-brackets
and all the candelabra, as well as those
already burning before the holy pictures; soon
the whole church was brilliantly lit up. Only
the darkness in the roof above seemed still
denser by contrast, and the faces of the saints
peering out of the frames looked as unearthly as
before. He approached the bier, looked nervously
at the face of the dead girl, could not
help shuddering slightly, and involuntarily closed

his eyes. What terrible and extraordinary
beauty!</p>

<p>He turned away and tried to go to one side,
but the strange curiosity and peculiar fascination
which men feel in moments of fear, compelled
him to look again and again, though with a
similar shudder. And in truth there was something
terrible about the beauty of the dead girl.
Perhaps she would not have inspired so much
fear had she been less beautiful; but there was
nothing ghastly or deathlike in the face, which
wore rather an expression of life, and it seemed
to the philosopher as though she were watching
him from under her closed eyelids. He even
thought he saw a tear roll from under the eyelash
of her right eye, but when it was half-way
down her cheek, he saw that it was a drop
of blood.</p>

<p>He quickly went into one of the stalls, opened
his book, and began to read the prayers in a very
loud voice in order to keep up his courage. His
deep voice sounded strange to himself in the
grave-like silence; it aroused no echo in the
silent and desolate wooden walls of the church.</p>

<p>&ldquo;What is there to be afraid of?&rdquo; he thought
to himself. &ldquo;She will not rise from her bier,
since she fears God's word. She will remain
quietly resting. Yes, and what sort of a Cossack
should I be, if I were afraid? The fact is, I
have drunk a little too much&mdash;that is why I feel

so queer. Let me take a pinch of snuff. It is
really excellent&mdash;first-rate!&rdquo;</p>

<p>At the same time he cast a furtive glance over
the pages of the prayer-book towards the bier,
and involuntarily he said to himself, &ldquo;There!
See! She is getting up! Her head is already
above the edge of the coffin!&rdquo;</p>

<p>But a death-like silence prevailed; the coffin
was motionless, and all the candles shone
steadily. It was an awe-inspiring sight, this
church lit up at midnight, with the corpse in the
midst, and no living soul near but one. The
philosopher began to sing in various keys in
order to stifle his fears, but every moment he
glanced across at the coffin, and involuntarily the
question came to his lips, &ldquo;Suppose she rose up
after all?&rdquo;</p>

<p>But the coffin did not move. Nowhere was
there the slightest sound nor stir. Not even
did a cricket chirp in any corner. There was
nothing audible but the slight sputtering of
some distant candle, or the faint fall of a drop
of wax.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Suppose she rose up after all?&rdquo;</p>

<p>He raised his head. Then he looked round
him wildly and rubbed his eyes. Yes, she was
no longer lying in the coffin, but sitting upright.
He turned away his eyes, but at once looked
again, terrified, at the coffin. She stood up;
then she walked with closed eyes through the

church, stretching out her arms as though she
wanted to seize someone.</p>

<p>She now came straight towards him. Full of
alarm, he traced with his finger a circle round
himself; then in a loud voice he began to recite
the prayers and formulas of exorcism which he
had learnt from a monk who had often seen
witches and evil spirits.</p>

<p>She had almost reached the edge of the circle
which he had traced; but it was evident that she
had not the power to enter it. Her face wore a
bluish tint like that of one who has been several
days dead.</p>

<p>Thomas had not the courage to look at her, so
terrible was her appearance; her teeth chattered
and she opened her dead eyes, but as in her rage
she saw nothing, she turned in another direction
and felt with outstretched arms among the pillars
and corners of the church in the hope of seizing
him.</p>

<p>At last she stood still, made a threatening
gesture, and then lay down again in the coffin.</p>

<p>The philosopher could not recover his self-possession,
and kept on gazing anxiously at it.
Suddenly it rose from its place and began hurtling
about the church with a whizzing sound.
At one time it was almost directly over his head;
but the philosopher observed that it could not
pass over the area of his charmed circle, so he
kept on repeating his formulas of exorcism. The

coffin now fell with a crash in the middle of the
church, and remained lying there motionless.
The corpse rose again; it had now a greenish-blue
colour, but at the same moment the distant
crowing of a cock was audible, and it lay down
again.</p>

<p>The philosopher's heart beat violently, and the
perspiration poured in streams from his face;
but heartened by the crowing of the cock, he
rapidly repeated the prayers.</p>

<p>As the first light of dawn looked through the
windows, there came a deacon and the grey-haired
Javtuk, who acted as sacristan, in order
to release him. When he had reached the
house, he could not sleep for a long time; but at
last weariness overpowered him, and he slept till
noon. When he awoke, his experiences of the
night appeared to him like a dream. He was
given a quart of brandy to strengthen him.</p>

<p>At table he was again talkative and ate a fairly
large sucking pig almost without assistance.
But none the less he resolved to say nothing of
what he had seen, and to all curious questions
only returned the answer, &ldquo;Yes, some wonderful
things happened.&rdquo;</p>

<p>The philosopher was one of those men who,
when they have had a good meal, are uncommonly
amiable. He lay down on a bench, with
his pipe in his mouth, looked blandly at all, and
expectorated every minute.</p>

<p>But as the evening approached, he became
more and more pensive. About supper-time
nearly the whole company had assembled in order
to play &ldquo;krapli.&rdquo; This is a kind of game of
skittles, in which, instead of bowls, long staves
are used, and the winner has the right to ride on
the back of his opponent. It provided the spectators
with much amusement; sometimes the
groom, a huge man, would clamber on the back
of the swineherd, who was slim and short
and shrunken; another time the groom would
present his own back, while Dorosch sprang on
it shouting, &ldquo;What a regular ox!&rdquo; Those
of the company who were more staid sat by the
threshold of the kitchen. They looked uncommonly
serious, smoked their pipes, and did not
even smile when the younger ones went into fits
of laughter over some joke of the groom or
Spirid.</p>

<p>Thomas vainly attempted to take part in the
game; a gloomy thought was firmly fixed like a
nail in his head. In spite of his desperate efforts
to appear cheerful after supper, fear had overmastered
his whole being, and it increased with
the growing darkness.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Now it is time for us to go, Mr Student!&rdquo;
said the grey-haired Cossack, and stood up with
Dorosch. &ldquo;Let us betake ourselves to our
work.&rdquo;</p>

<p>Thomas was conducted to the church in the

same way as on the previous evening; again he
was left alone, and the door was bolted behind
him.</p>

<p>As soon as he found himself alone, he began
to feel in the grip of his fears. He again saw
the dark pictures of the saints in their gilt
frames, and the black coffin, which stood menacing
and silent in the middle of the church.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Never mind!&rdquo; he said to himself. &ldquo;I am
over the first shock. The first time I was frightened,
but I am not so at all now&mdash;no, not at
all!&rdquo;</p>

<p>He quickly went into a stall, drew a circle
round him with his finger, uttered some prayers
and formulas for exorcism, and then began to
read the prayers for the dead in a loud voice and
with the fixed resolution not to look up from the
book nor take notice of anything.</p>

<p>He did so for an hour, and began to grow a
little tired; he cleared his throat and drew his
snuff-box out of his pocket, but before he had
taken a pinch he looked nervously towards the
coffin.</p>

<p>A sudden chill shot through him. The witch
was already standing before him on the edge of
the circle, and had fastened her green eyes upon
him. He shuddered, looked down at the book,
and began to read his prayers and exorcisms
aloud. Yet all the while he was aware how her
teeth chattered, and how she stretched out her

arms to seize him. But when he cast a hasty
glance towards her, he saw that she was not
looking in his direction, and it was clear that she
could not see him.</p>

<p>Then she began to murmur in an undertone,
and terrible words escaped her lips&mdash;words that
sounded like the bubbling of boiling pitch. The
philosopher did not know their meaning, but he
knew that they signified something terrible, and
were intended to counteract his exorcisms.</p>

<p>After she had spoken, a stormy wind arose
in the church, and there was a noise like the
rushing of many birds. He heard the noise of
their wings and claws as they flapped against and
scratched at the iron bars of the church windows.
There were also violent blows on the church
door, as if someone were trying to break it in
pieces.</p>

<p>The philosopher's heart beat violently; he did
not dare to look up, but continued to read
the prayers without a pause. At last there was
heard in the distance the shrill sound of a cock's
crow. The exhausted philosopher stopped and
gave a great sigh of relief.</p>

<p>Those who came to release him found him
more dead than alive; he had leant his back
against the wall, and stood motionless, regarding
them without any expression in his eyes.
They were obliged almost to carry him to the
house; he then shook himself, asked for and

drank a quart of brandy. He passed his hand
through his hair and said, &ldquo;There are all sorts
of horrors in the world, and such dreadful things
happen that<span style="white-space: nowrap;">&mdash;&mdash;</span>&rdquo; Here he made a gesture as
though to ward off something. All who heard
him bent their heads forward in curiosity.
Even a small boy, who ran on everyone's
errands, stood by with his mouth wide open.</p>

<p>Just then a young woman in a close-fitting
dress passed by. She was the old cook's assistant,
and very coquettish; she always stuck
something in her bodice by way of ornament, a
ribbon or a flower, or even a piece of paper if
she could find nothing else.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Good day, Thomas,&rdquo; she said, as she saw
the philosopher. &ldquo;Dear me! what has happened
to you?&rdquo; she exclaimed, striking her
hands together.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Well, what is it, you silly creature?&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Good heavens! You have grown quite
grey!&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Yes, so he has!&rdquo; said Spirid, regarding him
more closely. &ldquo;You have grown as grey as our
old Javtuk.&rdquo;</p>

<p>When the philosopher heard that, he hastened
into the kitchen, where he had noticed on the wall
a dirty, three-cornered piece of looking-glass.
In front of it hung some forget-me-nots, evergreens,
and a small garland&mdash;a proof that it was
the toilette-glass of the young coquette. With

alarm he saw that it actually was as they had
said&mdash;his hair was quite grizzled.</p>

<p>He sank into a reverie; at last he said to
himself, &ldquo;I will go to the colonel, tell him all,
and declare that I will read no more prayers.
He must send me back at once to Kieff.&rdquo; With
this intention he turned towards the door-steps
of the colonel's house.</p>

<p>The colonel was sitting motionless in his room;
his face displayed the same hopeless grief which
Thomas had observed on it on his first arrival,
only the hollows in his cheeks had deepened. It
was obvious that he took very little or no food.
A strange paleness made him look almost as
though made of marble.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Good day,&rdquo; he said as he observed Thomas
standing, cap in hand, at the door. &ldquo;Well,
how are you getting on? All right?&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Yes, sir, all right! Such hellish things are
going on, that one would like to rush away as
far as one's feet can carry one.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;How so?&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Your daughter, sir&hellip;. When one considers
the matter, she is, of course, of noble
descent&mdash;no one can dispute that; but don't be
angry, and may God grant her eternal rest!&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Very well! What about her?&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;She is in league with the devil. She
inspires one with such dread that all prayers are
useless.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Pray! Pray! It was not for nothing that
she sent for you. My dove was troubled about
her salvation, and wished to expel all evil
influences by means of prayer.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;I swear, gracious sir, it is beyond my
power.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Pray! Pray!&rdquo; continued the colonel in the
same persuasive tone. &ldquo;There is only one night
more; you are doing a Christian work, and I will
reward you richly.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;However great your rewards may be, I will
not read the prayers any more, sir,&rdquo; said
Thomas in a tone of decision.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Listen, philosopher!&rdquo; said the colonel with
a menacing air. &ldquo;I will not allow any objections.
In your seminary you may act as you
like, but here it won't do. If I have you
knouted, it will be somewhat different to the
rector's canings. Do you know what a strong
&lsquo;kantchuk&rsquo;<a name="FNanchor_2" href="#Footnote_2" class="fnanchor">(2)</a> is?&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Of course I do,&rdquo; said the philosopher in a
low voice; &ldquo;a number of them together are
insupportable.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Yes, I think so too. But you don't know
yet how hot my fellows can make it,&rdquo; replied
the colonel threateningly. He sprang up, and
his face assumed a fierce, despotic expression,
betraying the savagery of his nature, which
had been only temporarily modified by grief.

&ldquo;After the first flogging they pour on brandy
and then repeat it. Go away and finish your
work. If you don't obey, you won't be able
to stand again, and if you do, you will get a
thousand ducats.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;That is a devil of a fellow,&rdquo; thought the
philosopher to himself, and went out. &ldquo;One
can't trifle with him. But wait a little, my
friend; I will escape you so cleverly, that even
your hounds can't find me!&rdquo;</p>

<p>He determined, under any circumstances, to
run away, and only waited till the hour after
dinner arrived, when all the servants were accustomed
to take a nap on the hay in the barn, and
to snore and puff so loudly that it sounded as if
machinery had been set up there. At last the
time came. Even Javtuch stretched himself out
in the sun and closed his eyes. Tremblingly,
and on tiptoe, the philosopher stole softly into
the garden, whence he thought he could escape
more easily into the open country. This garden
was generally so choked up with weeds that it
seemed admirably adapted for such an attempt.
With the exception of a single path used by the
people of the house, the whole of it was covered
with cherry-trees, elder-bushes, and tall heath-thistles
with fibrous red buds. All these trees
and bushes had been thickly overgrown with ivy,
which formed a kind of roof. Its tendrils
reached to the hedge and fell down on the other

side in snake-like curves among the small, wild
field-flowers. Behind the hedge which bordered
the garden was a dense mass of wild heather, in
which it did not seem probable that anyone would
care to venture himself, and the strong, stubborn
stems of which seemed likely to baffle any
attempt to cut them.</p>

<p>As the philosopher was about to climb over the
hedge, his teeth chattered, and his heart beat
so violently that he felt frightened at it. The
skirts of his long cloak seemed to cling to the
ground as though they had been fastened to it
by pegs. When he had actually got over the
hedge he seemed to hear a shrill voice crying
behind him &ldquo;Whither? Whither?&rdquo;</p>

<p>He jumped into the heather and began to run,
stumbling over old roots and treading on unfortunate
moles. When he had emerged from the
heather he saw that he still had a wide field to
cross, behind which was a thick, thorny underwood.
This, according to his calculation, must
stretch as far as the road leading to Kieff, and
if he reached it he would be safe. Accordingly
he ran over the field and plunged into the thorny
copse. Every sharp thorn he encountered tore
a fragment from his coat. Then he reached a
small open space; in the centre of it stood a
willow, whose branches hung down to the earth,
and close by flowed a clear spring bright as
silver. The first thing the philosopher did was

to lie down and drink eagerly, for he was intolerably
thirsty.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Splendid water!&rdquo; he said, wiping his
mouth. &ldquo;This is a good place to rest in.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;No, better run farther; perhaps we are
being followed,&rdquo; said a voice immediately behind
him.</p>

<p>Thomas started and turned; before him stood
Javtuch.</p>

<p>&ldquo;This devil of a Javtuch!&rdquo; he thought. &ldquo;I
should like to seize him by the feet and smash
his hang-dog face against the trunk of a tree.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;Why did you go round such a long way?&rdquo;
continued Javtuch. &ldquo;You had much better
have chosen the path by which I came; it leads
directly by the stable. Besides, it is a pity about
your coat. Such splendid cloth! How much
did it cost an ell? Well, we have had a long
enough walk; it is time to go home.&rdquo;</p>

<p>The philosopher followed Javtuch in a very
depressed state.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Now the accursed witch will attack me in
earnest,&rdquo; he thought. &ldquo;But what have I really
to fear? Am I not a Cossack? I have read the
prayers for two nights already; with God's help
I will get through the third night also. It is plain
that the witch must have a terrible load of guilt
upon her, else the evil one would not help her
so much.&rdquo;</p>

<p>Feeling somewhat encouraged by these reflections,

he returned to the court-yard and asked
Dorosch, who sometimes, by the steward's permission,
had access to the wine-cellar, to fetch
him a small bottle of brandy. The two friends
sat down before a barn and drank a pretty
large one. Suddenly the philosopher jumped
up and said, &ldquo;I want musicians! Bring some
musicians!&rdquo;</p>

<p>But without waiting for them he began to
dance the &ldquo;tropak&rdquo; in the court-yard. He
danced till tea-time, and the servants, who, as is
usual in such cases, had formed a small circle
round him, grew at last tired of watching him,
and went away saying, &ldquo;By heavens, the man
can dance!&rdquo;</p>

<p>Finally the philosopher lay down in the place
where he had been dancing, and fell asleep.
It was necessary to pour a bucket of cold water
on his head to wake him up for supper. At the
meal he enlarged on the topic of what a Cossack
ought to be, and how he should not be afraid of
anything in the world.</p>

<p>&ldquo;It is time,&rdquo; said Javtuch; &ldquo;let us go.&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;I wish I could put a lighted match to your
tongue,&rdquo; thought the philosopher; then he stood
up and said, &ldquo;Let us go.&rdquo;</p>

<p>On their way to the church, the philosopher
kept looking round him on all sides, and tried to
start a conversation with his companions; but
both Javtuch and Dorosch remained silent. It

was a weird night. In the distance wolves
howled continually, and even the barking of the
dogs had something unearthly about it.</p>

<p>&ldquo;That doesn't sound like wolves howling, but
something else,&rdquo; remarked Dorosch.</p>

<p>Javtuch still kept silence, and the philosopher
did not know what answer to make.</p>

<p>They reached the church and walked over
the old wooden planks, whose rotten condition
showed how little the lord of the manor cared
about God and his soul. Javtuch and Dorosch
left the philosopher alone, as on the previous
evenings.</p>

<p>There was still the same atmosphere of menacing
silence in the church, in the centre of which
stood the coffin with the terrible witch inside it.</p>

<p>&ldquo;I am not afraid, by heavens, I am not
afraid!&rdquo; he said; and after drawing a circle
round himself as before, he began to read the
prayers and exorcisms.</p>

<p>An oppressive silence prevailed; the flickering
candles filled the church with their clear light.
The philosopher turned one page after another,
and noticed that he was not reading what was in
the book. Full of alarm, he crossed himself and
began to sing a hymn. This calmed him somewhat,
and he resumed his reading, turning the
pages rapidly as he did so.</p>

<p>Suddenly in the midst of the sepulchral silence
the iron lid of the coffin sprang open with a

jarring noise, and the dead witch stood up. She
was this time still more terrible in aspect than at
first. Her teeth chattered loudly and her lips,
through which poured a stream of dreadful
curses, moved convulsively. A whirlwind arose
in the church; the icons of the saints fell on the
ground, together with the broken window-panes.
The door was wrenched from its hinges, and a
huge mass of monstrous creatures rushed into
the church, which became filled with the noise
of beating wings and scratching claws. All these
creatures flew and crept about, seeking for the
philosopher, from whose brain the last fumes of
intoxication had vanished. He crossed himself
ceaselessly and uttered prayer after prayer, hearing
all the time the whole unclean swarm rustling
about him, and brushing him with the tips of
their wings. He had not the courage to look at
them; he only saw one uncouth monster standing
by the wall, with long, shaggy hair and two
flaming eyes. Over him something hung in the
air which looked like a gigantic bladder covered
with countless crabs' claws and scorpions' stings,
and with black clods of earth hanging from it.
All these monsters stared about seeking him, but
they could not find him, since he was protected
by his sacred circle.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Bring the Viy<a name="FNanchor_3" href="#Footnote_3" class="fnanchor">(3)</a>! Bring the Viy!&rdquo; cried
the witch.</p>

<p>A sudden silence followed; the howling of
wolves was heard in the distance, and soon
heavy footsteps resounded through the church.
Thomas looked up furtively and saw that an
ungainly human figure with crooked legs was
being led into the church. He was quite covered
with black soil, and his hands and feet resembled
knotted roots. He trod heavily and stumbled
at every step. His eyelids were of enormous
length. With terror, Thomas saw that his face
was of iron. They led him in by the arms and
placed him near Thomas's circle.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Raise my eyelids! I can't see anything!&rdquo;
said the Viy in a dull, hollow voice, and they all
hastened to help in doing so.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Don't look!&rdquo; an inner voice warned the
philosopher; but he could not restrain from
looking.</p>

<p>&ldquo;There he is!&rdquo; exclaimed the Viy, pointing
an iron finger at him; and all the monsters rushed
on him at once.</p>

<p>Struck dumb with terror, he sank to the
ground and died.</p>

<p>At that moment there sounded a cock's crow
for the second time; the earth-spirits had not
heard the first one. In alarm they hurried to the
windows and the door to get out as quickly as
possible. But it was too late; they all remained
hanging as though fastened to the door and the
windows.</p>

<p>When the priest came he stood amazed at such
a desecration of God's house, and did not venture
to read prayers there. The church remained
standing as it was, with the monsters hanging on
the windows and the door. Gradually it became
overgrown with creepers, bushes, and wild
heather, and no one can discover it now.</p>

<p class="dot-break">. . . . . .</p>

<p>When the report of this event reached Kieff,
and the theologian Khalava heard what a fate had
overtaken the philosopher Thomas, he sank for a
whole hour into deep reflection. He had greatly
altered of late; after finishing his studies he had
become bell-ringer of one of the chief churches
in the city, and he always appeared with a bruised
nose, because the belfry staircase was in a
ruinous condition.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Have you heard what has happened to
Thomas?&rdquo; said Tiberius Gorobetz, who had
become a philosopher and now wore a moustache.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Yes; God had appointed it so,&rdquo; answered
the bell-ringer. &ldquo;Let us go to the ale-house;
we will drink a glass to his memory.&rdquo;</p>

<p>The young philosopher, who, with the enthusiasm
of a novice, had made such full use of his
privileges as a student that his breeches and coat
and even his cap reeked of brandy and tobacco,
agreed readily to the proposal.</p>

<p>&ldquo;He was a fine fellow, Thomas,&rdquo; said the
bell-ringer as the limping innkeeper set the third

jug of beer before him. &ldquo;A splendid fellow!
And lost his life for nothing!&rdquo;</p>

<p>&ldquo;I know why he perished,&rdquo; said Gorobetz;
&ldquo;because he was afraid. If he had not feared
her, the witch could have done nothing to him.
One ought to cross oneself incessantly and spit
exactly on her tail, and then not the least harm
can happen. I know all about it, for here, in
Kieff, all the old women in the market-place are
witches.&rdquo;</p>

<p>The bell-ringer nodded assent. But being
aware that he could not say any more, he got up
cautiously and went out, swaying to the right and
left in order to find a hiding-place in the thick
steppe grass outside the town. At the same time,
in accordance with his old habits, he did not
forget to steal an old boot-sole which lay on the
ale-house bench.</p>

<p class="center" style="margin: 4em auto;">THE END</p>

<p class="center" style="font-size: smaller; margin-top: 8em;">THE NORTHUMBERLAND PRESS, THORNTON STREET, NEWCASTLE-UPON-TYNE</p>


<div class="footnotes">

<div class="footnote">
<p><a name="Footnote_1" href="#FNanchor_1" class="label">(1)</a>
Village priest.
</p>
</div>

<div class="footnote">
<p><a name="Footnote_2" href="#FNanchor_2" class="label">(2)</a>
Small scourge.
</p>
</div>

<div class="footnote">
<p><a name="Footnote_3" href="#FNanchor_3" class="label">(3)</a>
The king of the gnomes.
</p>
</div>
</div>


<div id="tnote-bottom">
<p class="center"><a name="tn-bottom"><b>Transcriber's Note:</b></a></p>
<p>The following is a list of corrections made to the original. The
first passage is the original passage, the second the corrected one.</p>

<ul id="corrections">
<li><a href="#cyclopedia">Front matter</a>:<br/>31 <span class="correction">(N.S)</span> 1809, died at Moscow, March<br/>31 <span class="correction">(N.S.),</span> 1809, died at Moscow, March</li>
<li><a href="#Page_9">Page 9</a>:<br/>under the <span class="correction">miscroscope</span> fatigues the eye, so does<br/>under the <span class="correction">microscope</span> fatigues the eye, so does</li>
<li><a href="#Page_88">Page 88</a>:<br/><span class="correction">hæmorroids</span>.&rdquo;<br/><span class="correction">hæmorrhoids</span>.&rdquo;</li>
<li><a href="#Page_102">Page 102</a>:<br/>Major looked by chance into a mirror and <span class="correction">percieved</span><br/>Major looked by chance into a mirror and <span class="correction">perceived</span></li>
<li><a href="#Page_136">Page 136</a>:<br/>I <span class="correction">advice</span> everyone urgently to write down the<br/>I <span class="correction">advise</span> everyone urgently to write down the</li>
<li><a href="#Page_137">Page 137</a>:<br/>the police orders to prevent the <span class="correction">moon</span> sitting on<br/>the police orders to prevent the <span class="correction">earth</span> sitting on</li>
<li><a href="#Page_137">Page 137</a>:<br/>the <span class="correction">earth</span>.<br/>the <span class="correction">moon</span>.</li>
<li><a href="#Page_148">Page 148</a>:<br/>of those who had been drowned, <span class="correction">anl</span> so escaped<br/>of those who had been drowned, <span class="correction">and</span> so escaped</li>
<li><a href="#Page_169">Page 169</a>:<br/>when you locked me up in the dark <span class="correction">room.</span><br/>when you locked me up in the dark <span class="correction">room?</span></li>
<li><a href="#Page_176">Page 176</a>:<br/>house is <span class="correction">bran-new</span>, and looks as though it<br/>house is <span class="correction">brand-new</span>, and looks as though it</li>
</ul>
</div>
