<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 3</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-3" epub:type="chapter">

<h2>
  THE CLOAK
</h2>
<p>
  In the department of&mdash;but it is better not to mention the department.
  There is nothing more irritable than departments, regiments, courts of
  justice, and, in a word, every branch of public service. Each individual
  attached to them nowadays thinks all society insulted in his person. Quite
  recently a complaint was received from a justice of the peace, in which he
  plainly demonstrated that all the imperial institutions were going to the
  dogs, and that the Czar&rsquo;s sacred name was being taken in vain; and in
  proof he appended to the complaint a romance in which the justice of the
  peace is made to appear about once every ten lines, and sometimes in a
  drunken condition. Therefore, in order to avoid all unpleasantness, it
  will be better to describe the department in question only as a certain
  department.
</p>
<p>
  So, in a certain department there was a certain official&mdash;not a very
  high one, it must be allowed&mdash;short of stature, somewhat pock-marked,
  red-haired, and short-sighted, with a bald forehead, wrinkled cheeks, and
  a complexion of the kind known as sanguine. The St. Petersburg climate was
  responsible for this. As for his official status, he was what is called a
  perpetual titular councillor, over which, as is well known, some writers
  make merry, and crack their jokes, obeying the praiseworthy custom of
  attacking those who cannot bite back.
</p>
<p>
  His family name was Bashmatchkin. This name is evidently derived from
  &ldquo;bashmak&rdquo; (shoe); but when, at what time, and in what manner, is not
  known. His father and grandfather, and all the Bashmatchkins, always wore
  boots, which only had new heels two or three times a year. His name was
  Akakiy Akakievitch. It may strike the reader as rather singular and
  far-fetched, but he may rest assured that it was by no means far-fetched,
  and that the circumstances were such that it would have been impossible to
  give him any other.
</p>
<p>
  This is how it came about.
</p>
<p>
  Akakiy Akakievitch was born, if my memory fails me not, in the evening of
  the 23rd of March. His mother, the wife of a Government official and a
  very fine woman, made all due arrangements for having the child baptised.
  She was lying on the bed opposite the door; on her right stood the
  godfather, Ivan Ivanovitch Eroshkin, a most estimable man, who served as
  presiding officer of the senate, while the godmother, Anna Semenovna
  Byelobrushkova, the wife of an officer of the quarter, and a woman of rare
  virtues. They offered the mother her choice of three names, Mokiya,
  Sossiya, or that the child should be called after the martyr Khozdazat.
  &ldquo;No,&rdquo; said the good woman, &ldquo;all those names are poor.&rdquo; In order to please
  her they opened the calendar to another place; three more names appeared,
  Triphiliy, Dula, and Varakhasiy. &ldquo;This is a judgment,&rdquo; said the old woman.
  &ldquo;What names! I truly never heard the like. Varada or Varukh might have
  been borne, but not Triphiliy and Varakhasiy!&rdquo; They turned to another page
  and found Pavsikakhiy and Vakhtisiy. &ldquo;Now I see,&rdquo; said the old woman,
  &ldquo;that it is plainly fate. And since such is the case, it will be better to
  name him after his father. His father&rsquo;s name was Akakiy, so let his son&rsquo;s
  be Akakiy too.&rdquo; In this manner he became Akakiy Akakievitch. They
  christened the child, whereat he wept and made a grimace, as though he
  foresaw that he was to be a titular councillor.
</p>
<p>
  In this manner did it all come about. We have mentioned it in order that
  the reader might see for himself that it was a case of necessity, and that
  it was utterly impossible to give him any other name. When and how he
  entered the department, and who appointed him, no one could remember.
  However much the directors and chiefs of all kinds were changed, he was
  always to be seen in the same place, the same attitude, the same
  occupation; so that it was afterwards affirmed that he had been born in
  undress uniform with a bald head. No respect was shown him in the
  department. The porter not only did not rise from his seat when he passed,
  but never even glanced at him, any more than if a fly had flown through
  the reception-room. His superiors treated him in coolly despotic fashion.
  Some sub-chief would thrust a paper under his nose without so much as
  saying, &ldquo;Copy,&rdquo; or &ldquo;Here&rsquo;s a nice interesting affair,&rdquo; or anything else
  agreeable, as is customary amongst well-bred officials. And he took it,
  looking only at the paper and not observing who handed it to him, or
  whether he had the right to do so; simply took it, and set about copying
  it.
</p>
<p>
  The young officials laughed at and made fun of him, so far as their
  official wit permitted; told in his presence various stories concocted
  about him, and about his landlady, an old woman of seventy; declared that
  she beat him; asked when the wedding was to be; and strewed bits of paper
  over his head, calling them snow. But Akakiy Akakievitch answered not a
  word, any more than if there had been no one there besides himself. It
  even had no effect upon his work: amid all these annoyances he never made
  a single mistake in a letter. But if the joking became wholly unbearable,
  as when they jogged his hand and prevented his attending to his work, he
  would exclaim, &ldquo;Leave me alone! Why do you insult me?&rdquo; And there was
  something strange in the words and the voice in which they were uttered.
  There was in it something which moved to pity; so much that one young man,
  a new-comer, who, taking pattern by the others, had permitted himself to
  make sport of Akakiy, suddenly stopped short, as though all about him had
  undergone a transformation, and presented itself in a different aspect.
  Some unseen force repelled him from the comrades whose acquaintance he had
  made, on the supposition that they were well-bred and polite men. Long
  afterwards, in his gayest moments, there recurred to his mind the little
  official with the bald forehead, with his heart-rending words, &ldquo;Leave me
  alone! Why do you insult me?&rdquo; In these moving words, other words resounded&mdash;&ldquo;I
  am thy brother.&rdquo; And the young man covered his face with his hand; and
  many a time afterwards, in the course of his life, shuddered at seeing how
  much inhumanity there is in man, how much savage coarseness is concealed
  beneath delicate, refined worldliness, and even, O God! in that man whom
  the world acknowledges as honourable and noble.
</p>
<p>
  It would be difficult to find another man who lived so entirely for his
  duties. It is not enough to say that Akakiy laboured with zeal: no, he
  laboured with love. In his copying, he found a varied and agreeable
  employment. Enjoyment was written on his face: some letters were even
  favourites with him; and when he encountered these, he smiled, winked, and
  worked with his lips, till it seemed as though each letter might be read
  in his face, as his pen traced it. If his pay had been in proportion to
  his zeal, he would, perhaps, to his great surprise, have been made even a
  councillor of state. But he worked, as his companions, the wits, put it,
  like a horse in a mill.
</p>
<p>
  Moreover, it is impossible to say that no attention was paid to him. One
  director being a kindly man, and desirous of rewarding him for his long
  service, ordered him to be given something more important than mere
  copying. So he was ordered to make a report of an already concluded affair
  to another department: the duty consisting simply in changing the heading
  and altering a few words from the first to the third person. This caused
  him so much toil that he broke into a perspiration, rubbed his forehead,
  and finally said, &ldquo;No, give me rather something to copy.&rdquo; After that they
  let him copy on forever.
</p>
<p>
  Outside this copying, it appeared that nothing existed for him. He gave no
  thought to his clothes: his undress uniform was not green, but a sort of
  rusty-meal colour. The collar was low, so that his neck, in spite of the
  fact that it was not long, seemed inordinately so as it emerged from it,
  like the necks of those plaster cats which wag their heads, and are
  carried about upon the heads of scores of image sellers. And something was
  always sticking to his uniform, either a bit of hay or some trifle.
  Moreover, he had a peculiar knack, as he walked along the street, of
  arriving beneath a window just as all sorts of rubbish were being flung
  out of it: hence he always bore about on his hat scraps of melon rinds and
  other such articles. Never once in his life did he give heed to what was
  going on every day in the street; while it is well known that his young
  brother officials train the range of their glances till they can see when
  any one&rsquo;s trouser straps come undone upon the opposite sidewalk, which
  always brings a malicious smile to their faces. But Akakiy Akakievitch saw
  in all things the clean, even strokes of his written lines; and only when
  a horse thrust his nose, from some unknown quarter, over his shoulder, and
  sent a whole gust of wind down his neck from his nostrils, did he observe
  that he was not in the middle of a page, but in the middle of the street.
</p>
<p>
  On reaching home, he sat down at once at the table, supped his cabbage
  soup up quickly, and swallowed a bit of beef with onions, never noticing
  their taste, and gulping down everything with flies and anything else
  which the Lord happened to send at the moment. His stomach filled, he rose
  from the table, and copied papers which he had brought home. If there
  happened to be none, he took copies for himself, for his own
  gratification, especially if the document was noteworthy, not on account
  of its style, but of its being addressed to some distinguished person.
</p>
<p>
  Even at the hour when the grey St. Petersburg sky had quite dispersed, and
  all the official world had eaten or dined, each as he could, in accordance
  with the salary he received and his own fancy; when all were resting from
  the departmental jar of pens, running to and fro from their own and other
  people&rsquo;s indispensable occupations, and from all the work that an uneasy
  man makes willingly for himself, rather than what is necessary; when
  officials hasten to dedicate to pleasure the time which is left to them,
  one bolder than the rest going to the theatre; another, into the street
  looking under all the bonnets; another wasting his evening in compliments
  to some pretty girl, the star of a small official circle; another&mdash;and
  this is the common case of all&mdash;visiting his comrades on the fourth
  or third floor, in two small rooms with an ante-room or kitchen, and some
  pretensions to fashion, such as a lamp or some other trifle which has cost
  many a sacrifice of dinner or pleasure trip; in a word, at the hour when
  all officials disperse among the contracted quarters of their friends, to
  play whist, as they sip their tea from glasses with a kopek&rsquo;s worth of
  sugar, smoke long pipes, relate at times some bits of gossip which a
  Russian man can never, under any circumstances, refrain from, and, when
  there is nothing else to talk of, repeat eternal anecdotes about the
  commandant to whom they had sent word that the tails of the horses on the
  Falconet Monument had been cut off, when all strive to divert themselves,
  Akakiy Akakievitch indulged in no kind of diversion. No one could ever say
  that he had seen him at any kind of evening party. Having written to his
  heart&rsquo;s content, he lay down to sleep, smiling at the thought of the
  coming day&mdash;of what God might send him to copy on the morrow.
</p>
<p>
  Thus flowed on the peaceful life of the man, who, with a salary of four
  hundred rubles, understood how to be content with his lot; and thus it
  would have continued to flow on, perhaps, to extreme old age, were it not
  that there are various ills strewn along the path of life for titular
  councillors as well as for private, actual, court, and every other species
  of councillor, even for those who never give any advice or take any
  themselves.
</p>
<p>
  There exists in St. Petersburg a powerful foe of all who receive a salary
  of four hundred rubles a year, or thereabouts. This foe is no other than
  the Northern cold, although it is said to be very healthy. At nine o&rsquo;clock
  in the morning, at the very hour when the streets are filled with men
  bound for the various official departments, it begins to bestow such
  powerful and piercing nips on all noses impartially that the poor
  officials really do not know what to do with them. At an hour when the
  foreheads of even those who occupy exalted positions ache with the cold,
  and tears start to their eyes, the poor titular councillors are sometimes
  quite unprotected. Their only salvation lies in traversing as quickly as
  possible, in their thin little cloaks, five or six streets, and then
  warming their feet in the porter&rsquo;s room, and so thawing all their talents
  and qualifications for official service, which had become frozen on the
  way.
</p>
<p>
  Akakiy Akakievitch had felt for some time that his back and shoulders
  suffered with peculiar poignancy, in spite of the fact that he tried to
  traverse the distance with all possible speed. He began finally to wonder
  whether the fault did not lie in his cloak. He examined it thoroughly at
  home, and discovered that in two places, namely, on the back and
  shoulders, it had become thin as gauze: the cloth was worn to such a
  degree that he could see through it, and the lining had fallen into
  pieces. You must know that Akakiy Akakievitch&rsquo;s cloak served as an object
  of ridicule to the officials: they even refused it the noble name of
  cloak, and called it a cape. In fact, it was of singular make: its collar
  diminishing year by year, but serving to patch its other parts. The
  patching did not exhibit great skill on the part of the tailor, and was,
  in fact, baggy and ugly. Seeing how the matter stood, Akakiy Akakievitch
  decided that it would be necessary to take the cloak to Petrovitch, the
  tailor, who lived somewhere on the fourth floor up a dark stair-case, and
  who, in spite of his having but one eye, and pock-marks all over his face,
  busied himself with considerable success in repairing the trousers and
  coats of officials and others; that is to say, when he was sober and not
  nursing some other scheme in his head.
</p>
<p>
  It is not necessary to say much about this tailor; but, as it is the
  custom to have the character of each personage in a novel clearly defined,
  there is no help for it, so here is Petrovitch the tailor. At first he was
  called only Grigoriy, and was some gentleman&rsquo;s serf; he commenced calling
  himself Petrovitch from the time when he received his free papers, and
  further began to drink heavily on all holidays, at first on the great
  ones, and then on all church festivities without discrimination, wherever
  a cross stood in the calendar. On this point he was faithful to ancestral
  custom; and when quarrelling with his wife, he called her a low female and
  a German. As we have mentioned his wife, it will be necessary to say a
  word or two about her. Unfortunately, little is known of her beyond the
  fact that Petrovitch has a wife, who wears a cap and a dress; but cannot
  lay claim to beauty, at least, no one but the soldiers of the guard even
  looked under her cap when they met her.
</p>
<p>
  Ascending the staircase which led to Petrovitch&rsquo;s room&mdash;which
  staircase was all soaked with dish-water, and reeked with the smell of
  spirits which affects the eyes, and is an inevitable adjunct to all dark
  stairways in St. Petersburg houses&mdash;ascending the stairs, Akakiy
  Akakievitch pondered how much Petrovitch would ask, and mentally resolved
  not to give more than two rubles. The door was open; for the mistress, in
  cooking some fish, had raised such a smoke in the kitchen that not even
  the beetles were visible. Akakiy Akakievitch passed through the kitchen
  unperceived, even by the housewife, and at length reached a room where he
  beheld Petrovitch seated on a large unpainted table, with his legs tucked
  under him like a Turkish pasha. His feet were bare, after the fashion of
  tailors who sit at work; and the first thing which caught the eye was his
  thumb, with a deformed nail thick and strong as a turtle&rsquo;s shell. About
  Petrovitch&rsquo;s neck hung a skein of silk and thread, and upon his knees lay
  some old garment. He had been trying unsuccessfully for three minutes to
  thread his needle, and was enraged at the darkness and even at the thread,
  growling in a low voice, &ldquo;It won&rsquo;t go through, the barbarian! you pricked
  me, you rascal!&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  Akakiy Akakievitch was vexed at arriving at the precise moment when
  Petrovitch was angry; he liked to order something of Petrovitch when the
  latter was a little downhearted, or, as his wife expressed it, &ldquo;when he
  had settled himself with brandy, the one-eyed devil!&rdquo; Under such
  circumstances, Petrovitch generally came down in his price very readily,
  and even bowed and returned thanks. Afterwards, to be sure, his wife would
  come, complaining that her husband was drunk, and so had fixed the price
  too low; but, if only a ten-kopek piece were added, then the matter was
  settled. But now it appeared that Petrovitch was in a sober condition, and
  therefore rough, taciturn, and inclined to demand, Satan only knows what
  price. Akakiy Akakievitch felt this, and would gladly have beat a retreat;
  but he was in for it. Petrovitch screwed up his one eye very intently at
  him, and Akakiy Akakievitch involuntarily said: &ldquo;How do you do,
  Petrovitch?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;I wish you a good morning, sir,&rdquo; said Petrovitch, squinting at Akakiy
  Akakievitch&rsquo;s hands, to see what sort of booty he had brought.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Ah! I&mdash;to you, Petrovitch, this&mdash;&rdquo; It must be known that Akakiy
  Akakievitch expressed himself chiefly by prepositions, adverbs, and scraps
  of phrases which had no meaning whatever. If the matter was a very
  difficult one, he had a habit of never completing his sentences; so that
  frequently, having begun a phrase with the words, &ldquo;This, in fact, is quite&mdash;&rdquo;
   he forgot to go on, thinking that he had already finished it.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;What is it?&rdquo; asked Petrovitch, and with his one eye scanned Akakievitch&rsquo;s
  whole uniform from the collar down to the cuffs, the back, the tails and
  the button-holes, all of which were well known to him, since they were his
  own handiwork. Such is the habit of tailors; it is the first thing they do
  on meeting one.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;But I, here, this&mdash;Petrovitch&mdash;a cloak, cloth&mdash;here you
  see, everywhere, in different places, it is quite strong&mdash;it is a
  little dusty, and looks old, but it is new, only here in one place it is a
  little&mdash;on the back, and here on one of the shoulders, it is a little
  worn, yes, here on this shoulder it is a little&mdash;do you see? that is
  all. And a little work&mdash;&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  Petrovitch took the cloak, spread it out, to begin with, on the table,
  looked hard at it, shook his head, reached out his hand to the window-sill
  for his snuff-box, adorned with the portrait of some general, though what
  general is unknown, for the place where the face should have been had been
  rubbed through by the finger, and a square bit of paper had been pasted
  over it. Having taken a pinch of snuff, Petrovitch held up the cloak, and
  inspected it against the light, and again shook his head once more. After
  which he again lifted the general-adorned lid with its bit of pasted
  paper, and having stuffed his nose with snuff, closed and put away the
  snuff-box, and said finally, &ldquo;No, it is impossible to mend it; it&rsquo;s a
  wretched garment!&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  Akakiy Akakievitch&rsquo;s heart sank at these words.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Why is it impossible, Petrovitch?&rdquo; he said, almost in the pleading voice
  of a child; &ldquo;all that ails it is, that it is worn on the shoulders. You
  must have some pieces&mdash;&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Yes, patches could be found, patches are easily found,&rdquo; said Petrovitch,
  &ldquo;but there&rsquo;s nothing to sew them to. The thing is completely rotten; if
  you put a needle to it&mdash;see, it will give way.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Let it give way, and you can put on another patch at once.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;But there is nothing to put the patches on to; there&rsquo;s no use in
  strengthening it; it is too far gone. It&rsquo;s lucky that it&rsquo;s cloth; for, if
  the wind were to blow, it would fly away.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Well, strengthen it again. How will this, in fact&mdash;&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;No,&rdquo; said Petrovitch decisively, &ldquo;there is nothing to be done with it.
  It&rsquo;s a thoroughly bad job. You&rsquo;d better, when the cold winter weather
  comes on, make yourself some gaiters out of it, because stockings are not
  warm. The Germans invented them in order to make more money.&rdquo; Petrovitch
  loved, on all occasions, to have a fling at the Germans. &ldquo;But it is plain
  you must have a new cloak.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  At the word &ldquo;new,&rdquo; all grew dark before Akakiy Akakievitch&rsquo;s eyes, and
  everything in the room began to whirl round. The only thing he saw clearly
  was the general with the paper face on the lid of Petrovitch&rsquo;s snuff-box.
  &ldquo;A new one?&rdquo; said he, as if still in a dream: &ldquo;why, I have no money for
  that.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Yes, a new one,&rdquo; said Petrovitch, with barbarous composure.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Well, if it came to a new one, how would it&mdash;?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;You mean how much would it cost?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Yes.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Well, you would have to lay out a hundred and fifty or more,&rdquo; said
  Petrovitch, and pursed up his lips significantly. He liked to produce
  powerful effects, liked to stun utterly and suddenly, and then to glance
  sideways to see what face the stunned person would put on the matter.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;A hundred and fifty rubles for a cloak!&rdquo; shrieked poor Akakiy
  Akakievitch, perhaps for the first time in his life, for his voice had
  always been distinguished for softness.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Yes, sir,&rdquo; said Petrovitch, &ldquo;for any kind of cloak. If you have a marten
  fur on the collar, or a silk-lined hood, it will mount up to two hundred.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Petrovitch, please,&rdquo; said Akakiy Akakievitch in a beseeching tone, not
  hearing, and not trying to hear, Petrovitch&rsquo;s words, and disregarding all
  his &ldquo;effects,&rdquo; &ldquo;some repairs, in order that it may wear yet a little
  longer.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;No, it would only be a waste of time and money,&rdquo; said Petrovitch; and
  Akakiy Akakievitch went away after these words, utterly discouraged. But
  Petrovitch stood for some time after his departure, with significantly
  compressed lips, and without betaking himself to his work, satisfied that
  he would not be dropped, and an artistic tailor employed.
</p>
<p>
  Akakiy Akakievitch went out into the street as if in a dream. &ldquo;Such an
  affair!&rdquo; he said to himself: &ldquo;I did not think it had come to&mdash;&rdquo; and
  then after a pause, he added, &ldquo;Well, so it is! see what it has come to at
  last! and I never imagined that it was so!&rdquo; Then followed a long silence,
  after which he exclaimed, &ldquo;Well, so it is! see what already&mdash;nothing
  unexpected that&mdash;it would be nothing&mdash;what a strange
  circumstance!&rdquo; So saying, instead of going home, he went in exactly the
  opposite direction without himself suspecting it. On the way, a
  chimney-sweep bumped up against him, and blackened his shoulder, and a
  whole hatful of rubbish landed on him from the top of a house which was
  building. He did not notice it; and only when he ran against a watchman,
  who, having planted his halberd beside him, was shaking some snuff from
  his box into his horny hand, did he recover himself a little, and that
  because the watchman said, &ldquo;Why are you poking yourself into a man&rsquo;s very
  face? Haven&rsquo;t you the pavement?&rdquo; This caused him to look about him, and
  turn towards home.
</p>
<p>
  There only, he finally began to collect his thoughts, and to survey his
  position in its clear and actual light, and to argue with himself,
  sensibly and frankly, as with a reasonable friend with whom one can
  discuss private and personal matters. &ldquo;No,&rdquo; said Akakiy Akakievitch, &ldquo;it
  is impossible to reason with Petrovitch now; he is that&mdash;evidently
  his wife has been beating him. I&rsquo;d better go to him on Sunday morning;
  after Saturday night he will be a little cross-eyed and sleepy, for he
  will want to get drunk, and his wife won&rsquo;t give him any money; and at such
  a time, a ten-kopek piece in his hand will&mdash;he will become more fit
  to reason with, and then the cloak, and that&mdash;&rdquo; Thus argued Akakiy
  Akakievitch with himself, regained his courage, and waited until the first
  Sunday, when, seeing from afar that Petrovitch&rsquo;s wife had left the house,
  he went straight to him.
</p>
<p>
  Petrovitch&rsquo;s eye was, indeed, very much askew after Saturday: his head
  drooped, and he was very sleepy; but for all that, as soon as he knew what
  it was a question of, it seemed as though Satan jogged his memory.
  &ldquo;Impossible,&rdquo; said he: &ldquo;please to order a new one.&rdquo; Thereupon Akakiy
  Akakievitch handed over the ten-kopek piece. &ldquo;Thank you, sir; I will drink
  your good health,&rdquo; said Petrovitch: &ldquo;but as for the cloak, don&rsquo;t trouble
  yourself about it; it is good for nothing. I will make you a capital new
  one, so let us settle about it now.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  Akakiy Akakievitch was still for mending it; but Petrovitch would not hear
  of it, and said, &ldquo;I shall certainly have to make you a new one, and you
  may depend upon it that I shall do my best. It may even be, as the fashion
  goes, that the collar can be fastened by silver hooks under a flap.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  Then Akakiy Akakievitch saw that it was impossible to get along without a
  new cloak, and his spirit sank utterly. How, in fact, was it to be done?
  Where was the money to come from? He might, to be sure, depend, in part,
  upon his present at Christmas; but that money had long been allotted
  beforehand. He must have some new trousers, and pay a debt of long
  standing to the shoemaker for putting new tops to his old boots, and he
  must order three shirts from the seamstress, and a couple of pieces of
  linen. In short, all his money must be spent; and even if the director
  should be so kind as to order him to receive forty-five rubles instead of
  forty, or even fifty, it would be a mere nothing, a mere drop in the ocean
  towards the funds necessary for a cloak: although he knew that Petrovitch
  was often wrong-headed enough to blurt out some outrageous price, so that
  even his own wife could not refrain from exclaiming, &ldquo;Have you lost your
  senses, you fool?&rdquo; At one time he would not work at any price, and now it
  was quite likely that he had named a higher sum than the cloak would cost.
</p>
<p>
  But although he knew that Petrovitch would undertake to make a cloak for
  eighty rubles, still, where was he to get the eighty rubles from? He might
  possibly manage half, yes, half might be procured, but where was the other
  half to come from? But the reader must first be told where the first half
  came from. Akakiy Akakievitch had a habit of putting, for every ruble he
  spent, a groschen into a small box, fastened with a lock and key, and with
  a slit in the top for the reception of money. At the end of every
  half-year he counted over the heap of coppers, and changed it for silver.
  This he had done for a long time, and in the course of years, the sum had
  mounted up to over forty rubles. Thus he had one half on hand; but where
  was he to find the other half? where was he to get another forty rubles
  from? Akakiy Akakievitch thought and thought, and decided that it would be
  necessary to curtail his ordinary expenses, for the space of one year at
  least, to dispense with tea in the evening; to burn no candles, and, if
  there was anything which he must do, to go into his landlady&rsquo;s room, and
  work by her light. When he went into the street, he must walk as lightly
  as he could, and as cautiously, upon the stones, almost upon tiptoe, in
  order not to wear his heels down in too short a time; he must give the
  laundress as little to wash as possible; and, in order not to wear out his
  clothes, he must take them off, as soon as he got home, and wear only his
  cotton dressing-gown, which had been long and carefully saved.
</p>
<p>
  To tell the truth, it was a little hard for him at first to accustom
  himself to these deprivations; but he got used to them at length, after a
  fashion, and all went smoothly. He even got used to being hungry in the
  evening, but he made up for it by treating himself, so to say, in spirit,
  by bearing ever in mind the idea of his future cloak. From that time forth
  his existence seemed to become, in some way, fuller, as if he were
  married, or as if some other man lived in him, as if, in fact, he were not
  alone, and some pleasant friend had consented to travel along life&rsquo;s path
  with him, the friend being no other than the cloak, with thick wadding and
  a strong lining incapable of wearing out. He became more lively, and even
  his character grew firmer, like that of a man who has made up his mind,
  and set himself a goal. From his face and gait, doubt and indecision, all
  hesitating and wavering traits disappeared of themselves. Fire gleamed in
  his eyes, and occasionally the boldest and most daring ideas flitted
  through his mind; why not, for instance, have marten fur on the collar?
  The thought of this almost made him absent-minded. Once, in copying a
  letter, he nearly made a mistake, so that he exclaimed almost aloud,
  &ldquo;Ugh!&rdquo; and crossed himself. Once, in the course of every month, he had a
  conference with Petrovitch on the subject of the cloak, where it would be
  better to buy the cloth, and the colour, and the price. He always returned
  home satisfied, though troubled, reflecting that the time would come at
  last when it could all be bought, and then the cloak made.
</p>
<p>
  The affair progressed more briskly than he had expected. Far beyond all
  his hopes, the director awarded neither forty nor forty-five rubles for
  Akakiy Akakievitch&rsquo;s share, but sixty. Whether he suspected that Akakiy
  Akakievitch needed a cloak, or whether it was merely chance, at all
  events, twenty extra rubles were by this means provided. This circumstance
  hastened matters. Two or three months more of hunger and Akakiy
  Akakievitch had accumulated about eighty rubles. His heart, generally so
  quiet, began to throb. On the first possible day, he went shopping in
  company with Petrovitch. They bought some very good cloth, and at a
  reasonable rate too, for they had been considering the matter for six
  months, and rarely let a month pass without their visiting the shops to
  inquire prices. Petrovitch himself said that no better cloth could be had.
  For lining, they selected a cotton stuff, but so firm and thick that
  Petrovitch declared it to be better than silk, and even prettier and more
  glossy. They did not buy the marten fur, because it was, in fact, dear,
  but in its stead, they picked out the very best of cat-skin which could be
  found in the shop, and which might, indeed, be taken for marten at a
  distance.
</p>
<p>
  Petrovitch worked at the cloak two whole weeks, for there was a great deal
  of quilting: otherwise it would have been finished sooner. He charged
  twelve rubles for the job, it could not possibly have been done for less.
  It was all sewed with silk, in small, double seams; and Petrovitch went
  over each seam afterwards with his own teeth, stamping in various
  patterns.
</p>
<p>
  It was&mdash;it is difficult to say precisely on what day, but probably
  the most glorious one in Akakiy Akakievitch&rsquo;s life, when Petrovitch at
  length brought home the cloak. He brought it in the morning, before the
  hour when it was necessary to start for the department. Never did a cloak
  arrive so exactly in the nick of time; for the severe cold had set in, and
  it seemed to threaten to increase. Petrovitch brought the cloak himself as
  befits a good tailor. On his countenance was a significant expression,
  such as Akakiy Akakievitch had never beheld there. He seemed fully
  sensible that he had done no small deed, and crossed a gulf separating
  tailors who only put in linings, and execute repairs, from those who make
  new things. He took the cloak out of the pocket handkerchief in which he
  had brought it. The handkerchief was fresh from the laundress, and he put
  it in his pocket for use. Taking out the cloak, he gazed proudly at it,
  held it up with both hands, and flung it skilfully over the shoulders of
  Akakiy Akakievitch. Then he pulled it and fitted it down behind with his
  hand, and he draped it around Akakiy Akakievitch without buttoning it.
  Akakiy Akakievitch, like an experienced man, wished to try the sleeves.
  Petrovitch helped him on with them, and it turned out that the sleeves
  were satisfactory also. In short, the cloak appeared to be perfect, and
  most seasonable. Petrovitch did not neglect to observe that it was only
  because he lived in a narrow street, and had no signboard, and had known
  Akakiy Akakievitch so long, that he had made it so cheaply; but that if he
  had been in business on the Nevsky Prospect, he would have charged
  seventy-five rubles for the making alone. Akakiy Akakievitch did not care
  to argue this point with Petrovitch. He paid him, thanked him, and set out
  at once in his new cloak for the department. Petrovitch followed him, and,
  pausing in the street, gazed long at the cloak in the distance, after
  which he went to one side expressly to run through a crooked alley, and
  emerge again into the street beyond to gaze once more upon the cloak from
  another point, namely, directly in front.
</p>
<p>
  Meantime Akakiy Akakievitch went on in holiday mood. He was conscious
  every second of the time that he had a new cloak on his shoulders; and
  several times he laughed with internal satisfaction. In fact, there were
  two advantages, one was its warmth, the other its beauty. He saw nothing
  of the road, but suddenly found himself at the department. He took off his
  cloak in the ante-room, looked it over carefully, and confided it to the
  especial care of the attendant. It is impossible to say precisely how it
  was that every one in the department knew at once that Akakiy Akakievitch
  had a new cloak, and that the &ldquo;cape&rdquo; no longer existed. All rushed at the
  same moment into the ante-room to inspect it. They congratulated him and
  said pleasant things to him, so that he began at first to smile and then
  to grow ashamed. When all surrounded him, and said that the new cloak must
  be &ldquo;christened,&rdquo; and that he must give a whole evening at least to this,
  Akakiy Akakievitch lost his head completely, and did not know where he
  stood, what to answer, or how to get out of it. He stood blushing all over
  for several minutes, and was on the point of assuring them with great
  simplicity that it was not a new cloak, that it was so and so, that it was
  in fact the old &ldquo;cape.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  At length one of the officials, a sub-chief probably, in order to show
  that he was not at all proud, and on good terms with his inferiors, said,
  &ldquo;So be it, only I will give the party instead of Akakiy Akakievitch; I
  invite you all to tea with me to-night; it happens quite a propos, as it
  is my name-day.&rdquo; The officials naturally at once offered the sub-chief
  their congratulations and accepted the invitations with pleasure. Akakiy
  Akakievitch would have declined, but all declared that it was
  discourteous, that it was simply a sin and a shame, and that he could not
  possibly refuse. Besides, the notion became pleasant to him when he
  recollected that he should thereby have a chance of wearing his new cloak
  in the evening also.
</p>
<p>
  That whole day was truly a most triumphant festival day for Akakiy
  Akakievitch. He returned home in the most happy frame of mind, took off
  his cloak, and hung it carefully on the wall, admiring afresh the cloth
  and the lining. Then he brought out his old, worn-out cloak, for
  comparison. He looked at it and laughed, so vast was the difference. And
  long after dinner he laughed again when the condition of the &ldquo;cape&rdquo;
   recurred to his mind. He dined cheerfully, and after dinner wrote nothing,
  but took his ease for a while on the bed, until it got dark. Then he
  dressed himself leisurely, put on his cloak, and stepped out into the
  street. Where the host lived, unfortunately we cannot say: our memory
  begins to fail us badly; and the houses and streets in St. Petersburg have
  become so mixed up in our head that it is very difficult to get anything
  out of it again in proper form. This much is certain, that the official
  lived in the best part of the city; and therefore it must have been
  anything but near to Akakiy Akakievitch&rsquo;s residence. Akakiy Akakievitch
  was first obliged to traverse a kind of wilderness of deserted,
  dimly-lighted streets; but in proportion as he approached the official&rsquo;s
  quarter of the city, the streets became more lively, more populous, and
  more brilliantly illuminated. Pedestrians began to appear; handsomely
  dressed ladies were more frequently encountered; the men had otter skin
  collars to their coats; peasant waggoners, with their grate-like sledges
  stuck over with brass-headed nails, became rarer; whilst on the other
  hand, more and more drivers in red velvet caps, lacquered sledges and
  bear-skin coats began to appear, and carriages with rich hammer-cloths
  flew swiftly through the streets, their wheels scrunching the snow. Akakiy
  Akakievitch gazed upon all this as upon a novel sight. He had not been in
  the streets during the evening for years. He halted out of curiosity
  before a shop-window to look at a picture representing a handsome woman,
  who had thrown off her shoe, thereby baring her whole foot in a very
  pretty way; whilst behind her the head of a man with whiskers and a
  handsome moustache peeped through the doorway of another room. Akakiy
  Akakievitch shook his head and laughed, and then went on his way. Why did
  he laugh? Either because he had met with a thing utterly unknown, but for
  which every one cherishes, nevertheless, some sort of feeling; or else he
  thought, like many officials, as follows: &ldquo;Well, those French! What is to
  be said? If they do go in anything of that sort, why&mdash;&rdquo; But possibly
  he did not think at all.
</p>
<p>
  Akakiy Akakievitch at length reached the house in which the sub-chief
  lodged. The sub-chief lived in fine style: the staircase was lit by a
  lamp; his apartment being on the second floor. On entering the vestibule,
  Akakiy Akakievitch beheld a whole row of goloshes on the floor. Among
  them, in the centre of the room, stood a samovar or tea-urn, humming and
  emitting clouds of steam. On the walls hung all sorts of coats and cloaks,
  among which there were even some with beaver collars or velvet facings.
  Beyond, the buzz of conversation was audible, and became clear and loud
  when the servant came out with a trayful of empty glasses, cream-jugs, and
  sugar-bowls. It was evident that the officials had arrived long before,
  and had already finished their first glass of tea.
</p>
<p>
  Akakiy Akakievitch, having hung up his own cloak, entered the inner room.
  Before him all at once appeared lights, officials, pipes, and card-tables;
  and he was bewildered by the sound of rapid conversation rising from all
  the tables, and the noise of moving chairs. He halted very awkwardly in
  the middle of the room, wondering what he ought to do. But they had seen
  him. They received him with a shout, and all thronged at once into the
  ante-room, and there took another look at his cloak. Akakiy Akakievitch,
  although somewhat confused, was frank-hearted, and could not refrain from
  rejoicing when he saw how they praised his cloak. Then, of course, they
  all dropped him and his cloak, and returned, as was proper, to the tables
  set out for whist.
</p>
<p>
  All this, the noise, the talk, and the throng of people was rather
  overwhelming to Akakiy Akakievitch. He simply did not know where he stood,
  or where to put his hands, his feet, and his whole body. Finally he sat
  down by the players, looked at the cards, gazed at the face of one and
  another, and after a while began to gape, and to feel that it was
  wearisome, the more so as the hour was already long past when he usually
  went to bed. He wanted to take leave of the host; but they would not let
  him go, saying that he must not fail to drink a glass of champagne in
  honour of his new garment. In the course of an hour, supper, consisting of
  vegetable salad, cold veal, pastry, confectioner&rsquo;s pies, and champagne,
  was served. They made Akakiy Akakievitch drink two glasses of champagne,
  after which he felt things grow livelier.
</p>
<p>
  Still, he could not forget that it was twelve o&rsquo;clock, and that he should
  have been at home long ago. In order that the host might not think of some
  excuse for detaining him, he stole out of the room quickly, sought out, in
  the ante-room, his cloak, which, to his sorrow, he found lying on the
  floor, brushed it, picked off every speck upon it, put it on his
  shoulders, and descended the stairs to the street.
</p>
<p>
  In the street all was still bright. Some petty shops, those permanent
  clubs of servants and all sorts of folk, were open. Others were shut, but,
  nevertheless, showed a streak of light the whole length of the door-crack,
  indicating that they were not yet free of company, and that probably some
  domestics, male and female, were finishing their stories and conversations
  whilst leaving their masters in complete ignorance as to their
  whereabouts. Akakiy Akakievitch went on in a happy frame of mind: he even
  started to run, without knowing why, after some lady, who flew past like a
  flash of lightning. But he stopped short, and went on very quietly as
  before, wondering why he had quickened his pace. Soon there spread before
  him those deserted streets, which are not cheerful in the daytime, to say
  nothing of the evening. Now they were even more dim and lonely: the
  lanterns began to grow rarer, oil, evidently, had been less liberally
  supplied. Then came wooden houses and fences: not a soul anywhere; only
  the snow sparkled in the streets, and mournfully veiled the low-roofed
  cabins with their closed shutters. He approached the spot where the street
  crossed a vast square with houses barely visible on its farther side, a
  square which seemed a fearful desert.
</p>
<p>
  Afar, a tiny spark glimmered from some watchman&rsquo;s box, which seemed to
  stand on the edge of the world. Akakiy Akakievitch&rsquo;s cheerfulness
  diminished at this point in a marked degree. He entered the square, not
  without an involuntary sensation of fear, as though his heart warned him
  of some evil. He glanced back and on both sides, it was like a sea about
  him. &ldquo;No, it is better not to look,&rdquo; he thought, and went on, closing his
  eyes. When he opened them, to see whether he was near the end of the
  square, he suddenly beheld, standing just before his very nose, some
  bearded individuals of precisely what sort he could not make out. All grew
  dark before his eyes, and his heart throbbed.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;But, of course, the cloak is mine!&rdquo; said one of them in a loud voice,
  seizing hold of his collar. Akakiy Akakievitch was about to shout &ldquo;watch,&rdquo;
   when the second man thrust a fist, about the size of a man&rsquo;s head, into
  his mouth, muttering, &ldquo;Now scream!&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  Akakiy Akakievitch felt them strip off his cloak and give him a push with
  a knee: he fell headlong upon the snow, and felt no more. In a few minutes
  he recovered consciousness and rose to his feet; but no one was there. He
  felt that it was cold in the square, and that his cloak was gone; he began
  to shout, but his voice did not appear to reach to the outskirts of the
  square. In despair, but without ceasing to shout, he started at a run
  across the square, straight towards the watchbox, beside which stood the
  watchman, leaning on his halberd, and apparently curious to know what kind
  of a customer was running towards him and shouting. Akakiy Akakievitch ran
  up to him, and began in a sobbing voice to shout that he was asleep, and
  attended to nothing, and did not see when a man was robbed. The watchman
  replied that he had seen two men stop him in the middle of the square, but
  supposed that they were friends of his; and that, instead of scolding
  vainly, he had better go to the police on the morrow, so that they might
  make a search for whoever had stolen the cloak.
</p>
<p>
  Akakiy Akakievitch ran home in complete disorder; his hair, which grew
  very thinly upon his temples and the back of his head, wholly disordered;
  his body, arms, and legs covered with snow. The old woman, who was
  mistress of his lodgings, on hearing a terrible knocking, sprang hastily
  from her bed, and, with only one shoe on, ran to open the door, pressing
  the sleeve of her chemise to her bosom out of modesty; but when she had
  opened it, she fell back on beholding Akakiy Akakievitch in such a state.
  When he told her about the affair, she clasped her hands, and said that he
  must go straight to the district chief of police, for his subordinate
  would turn up his nose, promise well, and drop the matter there. The very
  best thing to do, therefore, would be to go to the district chief, whom
  she knew, because Finnish Anna, her former cook, was now nurse at his
  house. She often saw him passing the house; and he was at church every
  Sunday, praying, but at the same time gazing cheerfully at everybody; so
  that he must be a good man, judging from all appearances. Having listened
  to this opinion, Akakiy Akakievitch betook himself sadly to his room; and
  how he spent the night there any one who can put himself in another&rsquo;s
  place may readily imagine.
</p>
<p>
  Early in the morning, he presented himself at the district chief&rsquo;s; but
  was told that this official was asleep. He went again at ten and was again
  informed that he was asleep; at eleven, and they said: &ldquo;The superintendent
  is not at home;&rdquo; at dinner time, and the clerks in the ante-room would not
  admit him on any terms, and insisted upon knowing his business. So that at
  last, for once in his life, Akakiy Akakievitch felt an inclination to show
  some spirit, and said curtly that he must see the chief in person; that
  they ought not to presume to refuse him entrance; that he came from the
  department of justice, and that when he complained of them, they would
  see.
</p>
<p>
  The clerks dared make no reply to this, and one of them went to call the
  chief, who listened to the strange story of the theft of the coat. Instead
  of directing his attention to the principal points of the matter, he began
  to question Akakiy Akakievitch: Why was he going home so late? Was he in
  the habit of doing so, or had he been to some disorderly house? So that
  Akakiy Akakievitch got thoroughly confused, and left him without knowing
  whether the affair of his cloak was in proper train or not.
</p>
<p>
  All that day, for the first time in his life, he never went near the
  department. The next day he made his appearance, very pale, and in his old
  cape, which had become even more shabby. The news of the robbery of the
  cloak touched many; although there were some officials present who never
  lost an opportunity, even such a one as the present, of ridiculing Akakiy
  Akakievitch. They decided to make a collection for him on the spot, but
  the officials had already spent a great deal in subscribing for the
  director&rsquo;s portrait, and for some book, at the suggestion of the head of
  that division, who was a friend of the author; and so the sum was
  trifling.
</p>
<p>
  One of them, moved by pity, resolved to help Akakiy Akakievitch with some
  good advice at least, and told him that he ought not to go to the police,
  for although it might happen that a police-officer, wishing to win the
  approval of his superiors, might hunt up the cloak by some means, still
  his cloak would remain in the possession of the police if he did not offer
  legal proof that it belonged to him. The best thing for him, therefore,
  would be to apply to a certain prominent personage; since this prominent
  personage, by entering into relations with the proper persons, could
  greatly expedite the matter.
</p>
<p>
  As there was nothing else to be done, Akakiy Akakievitch decided to go to
  the prominent personage. What was the exact official position of the
  prominent personage remains unknown to this day. The reader must know that
  the prominent personage had but recently become a prominent personage,
  having up to that time been only an insignificant person. Moreover, his
  present position was not considered prominent in comparison with others
  still more so. But there is always a circle of people to whom what is
  insignificant in the eyes of others, is important enough. Moreover, he
  strove to increase his importance by sundry devices; for instance, he
  managed to have the inferior officials meet him on the staircase when he
  entered upon his service; no one was to presume to come directly to him,
  but the strictest etiquette must be observed; the collegiate recorder must
  make a report to the government secretary, the government secretary to the
  titular councillor, or whatever other man was proper, and all business
  must come before him in this manner. In Holy Russia all is thus
  contaminated with the love of imitation; every man imitates and copies his
  superior. They even say that a certain titular councillor, when promoted
  to the head of some small separate room, immediately partitioned off a
  private room for himself, called it the audience chamber, and posted at
  the door a lackey with red collar and braid, who grasped the handle of the
  door and opened to all comers; though the audience chamber could hardly
  hold an ordinary writing-table.
</p>
<p>
  The manners and customs of the prominent personage were grand and
  imposing, but rather exaggerated. The main foundation of his system was
  strictness. &ldquo;Strictness, strictness, and always strictness!&rdquo; he generally
  said; and at the last word he looked significantly into the face of the
  person to whom he spoke. But there was no necessity for this, for the
  half-score of subordinates who formed the entire force of the office were
  properly afraid; on catching sight of him afar off they left their work
  and waited, drawn up in line, until he had passed through the room. His
  ordinary converse with his inferiors smacked of sternness, and consisted
  chiefly of three phrases: &ldquo;How dare you?&rdquo; &ldquo;Do you know whom you are
  speaking to?&rdquo; &ldquo;Do you realise who stands before you?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  Otherwise he was a very kind-hearted man, good to his comrades, and ready
  to oblige; but the rank of general threw him completely off his balance.
  On receiving any one of that rank, he became confused, lost his way, as it
  were, and never knew what to do. If he chanced to be amongst his equals he
  was still a very nice kind of man, a very good fellow in many respects,
  and not stupid; but the very moment that he found himself in the society
  of people but one rank lower than himself he became silent; and his
  situation aroused sympathy, the more so as he felt himself that he might
  have been making an incomparably better use of his time. In his eyes there
  was sometimes visible a desire to join some interesting conversation or
  group; but he was kept back by the thought, &ldquo;Would it not be a very great
  condescension on his part? Would it not be familiar? and would he not
  thereby lose his importance?&rdquo; And in consequence of such reflections he
  always remained in the same dumb state, uttering from time to time a few
  monosyllabic sounds, and thereby earning the name of the most wearisome of
  men.
</p>
<p>
  To this prominent personage Akakiy Akakievitch presented himself, and this
  at the most unfavourable time for himself though opportune for the
  prominent personage. The prominent personage was in his cabinet conversing
  gaily with an old acquaintance and companion of his childhood whom he had
  not seen for several years and who had just arrived when it was announced
  to him that a person named Bashmatchkin had come. He asked abruptly, &ldquo;Who
  is he?&rdquo;&mdash;&ldquo;Some official,&rdquo; he was informed. &ldquo;Ah, he can wait! this is
  no time for him to call,&rdquo; said the important man.
</p>
<p>
  It must be remarked here that the important man lied outrageously: he had
  said all he had to say to his friend long before; and the conversation had
  been interspersed for some time with very long pauses, during which they
  merely slapped each other on the leg, and said, &ldquo;You think so, Ivan
  Abramovitch!&rdquo; &ldquo;Just so, Stepan Varlamitch!&rdquo; Nevertheless, he ordered that
  the official should be kept waiting, in order to show his friend, a man
  who had not been in the service for a long time, but had lived at home in
  the country, how long officials had to wait in his ante-room.
</p>
<p>
  At length, having talked himself completely out, and more than that,
  having had his fill of pauses, and smoked a cigar in a very comfortable
  arm-chair with reclining back, he suddenly seemed to recollect, and said
  to the secretary, who stood by the door with papers of reports, &ldquo;So it
  seems that there is a tchinovnik waiting to see me. Tell him that he may
  come in.&rdquo; On perceiving Akakiy Akakievitch&rsquo;s modest mien and his worn
  undress uniform, he turned abruptly to him and said, &ldquo;What do you want?&rdquo;
   in a curt hard voice, which he had practised in his room in private, and
  before the looking-glass, for a whole week before being raised to his
  present rank.
</p>
<p>
  Akakiy Akakievitch, who was already imbued with a due amount of fear,
  became somewhat confused: and as well as his tongue would permit,
  explained, with a rather more frequent addition than usual of the word
  &ldquo;that,&rdquo; that his cloak was quite new, and had been stolen in the most
  inhuman manner; that he had applied to him in order that he might, in some
  way, by his intermediation&mdash;that he might enter into correspondence
  with the chief of police, and find the cloak.
</p>
<p>
  For some inexplicable reason this conduct seemed familiar to the prominent
  personage. &ldquo;What, my dear sir!&rdquo; he said abruptly, &ldquo;are you not acquainted
  with etiquette? Where have you come from? Don&rsquo;t you know how such matters
  are managed? You should first have entered a complaint about this at the
  court below: it would have gone to the head of the department, then to the
  chief of the division, then it would have been handed over to the
  secretary, and the secretary would have given it to me.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;But, your excellency,&rdquo; said Akakiy Akakievitch, trying to collect his
  small handful of wits, and conscious at the same time that he was
  perspiring terribly, &ldquo;I, your excellency, presumed to trouble you because
  secretaries&mdash;are an untrustworthy race.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;What, what, what!&rdquo; said the important personage. &ldquo;Where did you get such
  courage? Where did you get such ideas? What impudence towards their chiefs
  and superiors has spread among the young generation!&rdquo; The prominent
  personage apparently had not observed that Akakiy Akakievitch was already
  in the neighbourhood of fifty. If he could be called a young man, it must
  have been in comparison with some one who was twenty. &ldquo;Do you know to whom
  you speak? Do you realise who stands before you? Do you realise it? do you
  realise it? I ask you!&rdquo; Then he stamped his foot and raised his voice to
  such a pitch that it would have frightened even a different man from
  Akakiy Akakievitch.
</p>
<p>
  Akakiy Akakievitch&rsquo;s senses failed him; he staggered, trembled in every
  limb, and, if the porters had not run to support him, would have fallen to
  the floor. They carried him out insensible. But the prominent personage,
  gratified that the effect should have surpassed his expectations, and
  quite intoxicated with the thought that his word could even deprive a man
  of his senses, glanced sideways at his friend in order to see how he
  looked upon this, and perceived, not without satisfaction, that his friend
  was in a most uneasy frame of mind, and even beginning, on his part, to
  feel a trifle frightened.
</p>
<p>
  Akakiy Akakievitch could not remember how he descended the stairs and got
  into the street. He felt neither his hands nor feet. Never in his life had
  he been so rated by any high official, let alone a strange one. He went
  staggering on through the snow-storm, which was blowing in the streets,
  with his mouth wide open; the wind, in St. Petersburg fashion, darted upon
  him from all quarters, and down every cross-street. In a twinkling it had
  blown a quinsy into his throat, and he reached home unable to utter a
  word. His throat was swollen, and he lay down on his bed. So powerful is
  sometimes a good scolding!
</p>
<p>
  The next day a violent fever showed itself. Thanks to the generous
  assistance of the St. Petersburg climate, the malady progressed more
  rapidly than could have been expected: and when the doctor arrived, he
  found, on feeling the sick man&rsquo;s pulse, that there was nothing to be done,
  except to prescribe a fomentation, so that the patient might not be left
  entirely without the beneficent aid of medicine; but at the same time, he
  predicted his end in thirty-six hours. After this he turned to the
  landlady, and said, &ldquo;And as for you, don&rsquo;t waste your time on him: order
  his pine coffin now, for an oak one will be too expensive for him.&rdquo; Did
  Akakiy Akakievitch hear these fatal words? and if he heard them, did they
  produce any overwhelming effect upon him? Did he lament the bitterness of
  his life?&mdash;We know not, for he continued in a delirious condition.
  Visions incessantly appeared to him, each stranger than the other. Now he
  saw Petrovitch, and ordered him to make a cloak, with some traps for
  robbers, who seemed to him to be always under the bed; and cried every
  moment to the landlady to pull one of them from under his coverlet. Then
  he inquired why his old mantle hung before him when he had a new cloak.
  Next he fancied that he was standing before the prominent person,
  listening to a thorough setting-down, and saying, &ldquo;Forgive me, your
  excellency!&rdquo; but at last he began to curse, uttering the most horrible
  words, so that his aged landlady crossed herself, never in her life having
  heard anything of the kind from him, the more so as those words followed
  directly after the words &ldquo;your excellency.&rdquo; Later on he talked utter
  nonsense, of which nothing could be made: all that was evident being, that
  his incoherent words and thoughts hovered ever about one thing, his cloak.
</p>
<p>
  At length poor Akakiy Akakievitch breathed his last. They sealed up
  neither his room nor his effects, because, in the first place, there were
  no heirs, and, in the second, there was very little to inherit beyond a
  bundle of goose-quills, a quire of white official paper, three pairs of
  socks, two or three buttons which had burst off his trousers, and the
  mantle already known to the reader. To whom all this fell, God knows. I
  confess that the person who told me this tale took no interest in the
  matter. They carried Akakiy Akakievitch out and buried him.
</p>
<p>
  And St. Petersburg was left without Akakiy Akakievitch, as though he had
  never lived there. A being disappeared who was protected by none, dear to
  none, interesting to none, and who never even attracted to himself the
  attention of those students of human nature who omit no opportunity of
  thrusting a pin through a common fly, and examining it under the
  microscope. A being who bore meekly the jibes of the department, and went
  to his grave without having done one unusual deed, but to whom,
  nevertheless, at the close of his life appeared a bright visitant in the
  form of a cloak, which momentarily cheered his poor life, and upon whom,
  thereafter, an intolerable misfortune descended, just as it descends upon
  the mighty of this world!
</p>
<p>
  Several days after his death, the porter was sent from the department to
  his lodgings, with an order for him to present himself there immediately;
  the chief commanding it. But the porter had to return unsuccessful, with
  the answer that he could not come; and to the question, &ldquo;Why?&rdquo; replied,
  &ldquo;Well, because he is dead! he was buried four days ago.&rdquo; In this manner
  did they hear of Akakiy Akakievitch&rsquo;s death at the department, and the
  next day a new official sat in his place, with a handwriting by no means
  so upright, but more inclined and slanting.
</p>
<p>
  But who could have imagined that this was not really the end of Akakiy
  Akakievitch, that he was destined to raise a commotion after death, as if
  in compensation for his utterly insignificant life? But so it happened,
  and our poor story unexpectedly gains a fantastic ending.
</p>
<p>
  A rumour suddenly spread through St. Petersburg that a dead man had taken
  to appearing on the Kalinkin Bridge and its vicinity at night in the form
  of a tchinovnik seeking a stolen cloak, and that, under the pretext of its
  being the stolen cloak, he dragged, without regard to rank or calling,
  every one&rsquo;s cloak from his shoulders, be it cat-skin, beaver, fox, bear,
  sable; in a word, every sort of fur and skin which men adopted for their
  covering. One of the department officials saw the dead man with his own
  eyes and immediately recognised in him Akakiy Akakievitch. This, however,
  inspired him with such terror that he ran off with all his might, and
  therefore did not scan the dead man closely, but only saw how the latter
  threatened him from afar with his finger. Constant complaints poured in
  from all quarters that the backs and shoulders, not only of titular but
  even of court councillors, were exposed to the danger of a cold on account
  of the frequent dragging off of their cloaks.
</p>
<p>
  Arrangements were made by the police to catch the corpse, alive or dead,
  at any cost, and punish him as an example to others in the most severe
  manner. In this they nearly succeeded; for a watchman, on guard in
  Kirushkin Alley, caught the corpse by the collar on the very scene of his
  evil deeds, when attempting to pull off the frieze coat of a retired
  musician. Having seized him by the collar, he summoned, with a shout, two
  of his comrades, whom he enjoined to hold him fast while he himself felt
  for a moment in his boot, in order to draw out his snuff-box and refresh
  his frozen nose. But the snuff was of a sort which even a corpse could not
  endure. The watchman having closed his right nostril with his finger, had
  no sooner succeeded in holding half a handful up to the left than the
  corpse sneezed so violently that he completely filled the eyes of all
  three. While they raised their hands to wipe them, the dead man vanished
  completely, so that they positively did not know whether they had actually
  had him in their grip at all. Thereafter the watchmen conceived such a
  terror of dead men that they were afraid even to seize the living, and
  only screamed from a distance, &ldquo;Hey, there! go your way!&rdquo; So the dead
  tchinovnik began to appear even beyond the Kalinkin Bridge, causing no
  little terror to all timid people.
</p>
<p>
  But we have totally neglected that certain prominent personage who may
  really be considered as the cause of the fantastic turn taken by this true
  history. First of all, justice compels us to say that after the departure
  of poor, annihilated Akakiy Akakievitch he felt something like remorse.
  Suffering was unpleasant to him, for his heart was accessible to many good
  impulses, in spite of the fact that his rank often prevented his showing
  his true self. As soon as his friend had left his cabinet, he began to
  think about poor Akakiy Akakievitch. And from that day forth, poor Akakiy
  Akakievitch, who could not bear up under an official reprimand, recurred
  to his mind almost every day. The thought troubled him to such an extent
  that a week later he even resolved to send an official to him, to learn
  whether he really could assist him; and when it was reported to him that
  Akakiy Akakievitch had died suddenly of fever, he was startled, hearkened
  to the reproaches of his conscience, and was out of sorts for the whole
  day.
</p>
<p>
  Wishing to divert his mind in some way, and drive away the disagreeable
  impression, he set out that evening for one of his friends&rsquo; houses, where
  he found quite a large party assembled. What was better, nearly every one
  was of the same rank as himself, so that he need not feel in the least
  constrained. This had a marvellous effect upon his mental state. He grew
  expansive, made himself agreeable in conversation, in short, he passed a
  delightful evening. After supper he drank a couple of glasses of champagne&mdash;not
  a bad recipe for cheerfulness, as every one knows. The champagne inclined
  him to various adventures; and he determined not to return home, but to go
  and see a certain well-known lady of German extraction, Karolina Ivanovna,
  a lady, it appears, with whom he was on a very friendly footing.
</p>
<p>
  It must be mentioned that the prominent personage was no longer a young
  man, but a good husband and respected father of a family. Two sons, one of
  whom was already in the service, and a good-looking, sixteen-year-old
  daughter, with a rather retrousse but pretty little nose, came every
  morning to kiss his hand and say, &ldquo;Bonjour, papa.&rdquo; His wife, a still fresh
  and good-looking woman, first gave him her hand to kiss, and then,
  reversing the procedure, kissed his. But the prominent personage, though
  perfectly satisfied in his domestic relations, considered it stylish to
  have a friend in another quarter of the city. This friend was scarcely
  prettier or younger than his wife; but there are such puzzles in the
  world, and it is not our place to judge them. So the important personage
  descended the stairs, stepped into his sledge, said to the coachman, &ldquo;To
  Karolina Ivanovna&rsquo;s,&rdquo; and, wrapping himself luxuriously in his warm cloak,
  found himself in that delightful frame of mind than which a Russian can
  conceive no better, namely, when you think of nothing yourself, yet when
  the thoughts creep into your mind of their own accord, each more agreeable
  than the other, giving you no trouble either to drive them away or seek
  them. Fully satisfied, he recalled all the gay features of the evening
  just passed, and all the mots which had made the little circle laugh. Many
  of them he repeated in a low voice, and found them quite as funny as
  before; so it is not surprising that he should laugh heartily at them.
  Occasionally, however, he was interrupted by gusts of wind, which, coming
  suddenly, God knows whence or why, cut his face, drove masses of snow into
  it, filled out his cloak-collar like a sail, or suddenly blew it over his
  head with supernatural force, and thus caused him constant trouble to
  disentangle himself.
</p>
<p>
  Suddenly the important personage felt some one clutch him firmly by the
  collar. Turning round, he perceived a man of short stature, in an old,
  worn uniform, and recognised, not without terror, Akakiy Akakievitch. The
  official&rsquo;s face was white as snow, and looked just like a corpse&rsquo;s. But
  the horror of the important personage transcended all bounds when he saw
  the dead man&rsquo;s mouth open, and, with a terrible odour of the grave, gave
  vent to the following remarks: &ldquo;Ah, here you are at last! I have you, that&mdash;by
  the collar! I need your cloak; you took no trouble about mine, but
  reprimanded me; so now give up your own.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  The pallid prominent personage almost died of fright. Brave as he was in
  the office and in the presence of inferiors generally, and although, at
  the sight of his manly form and appearance, every one said, &ldquo;Ugh! how much
  character he had!&rdquo; at this crisis, he, like many possessed of an heroic
  exterior, experienced such terror, that, not without cause, he began to
  fear an attack of illness. He flung his cloak hastily from his shoulders
  and shouted to his coachman in an unnatural voice, &ldquo;Home at full speed!&rdquo;
   The coachman, hearing the tone which is generally employed at critical
  moments and even accompanied by something much more tangible, drew his
  head down between his shoulders in case of an emergency, flourished his
  whip, and flew on like an arrow. In a little more than six minutes the
  prominent personage was at the entrance of his own house. Pale, thoroughly
  scared, and cloakless, he went home instead of to Karolina Ivanovna&rsquo;s,
  reached his room somehow or other, and passed the night in the direst
  distress; so that the next morning over their tea his daughter said, &ldquo;You
  are very pale to-day, papa.&rdquo; But papa remained silent, and said not a word
  to any one of what had happened to him, where he had been, or where he had
  intended to go.
</p>
<p>
  This occurrence made a deep impression upon him. He even began to say:
  &ldquo;How dare you? do you realise who stands before you?&rdquo; less frequently to
  the under-officials, and if he did utter the words, it was only after
  having first learned the bearings of the matter. But the most noteworthy
  point was, that from that day forward the apparition of the dead
  tchinovnik ceased to be seen. Evidently the prominent personage&rsquo;s cloak
  just fitted his shoulders; at all events, no more instances of his
  dragging cloaks from people&rsquo;s shoulders were heard of. But many active and
  apprehensive persons could by no means reassure themselves, and asserted
  that the dead tchinovnik still showed himself in distant parts of the
  city.
</p>
<p>
  In fact, one watchman in Kolomna saw with his own eyes the apparition come
  from behind a house. But being rather weak of body, he dared not arrest
  him, but followed him in the dark, until, at length, the apparition looked
  round, paused, and inquired, &ldquo;What do you want?&rdquo; at the same time showing
  a fist such as is never seen on living men. The watchman said, &ldquo;It&rsquo;s of no
  consequence,&rdquo; and turned back instantly. But the apparition was much too
  tall, wore huge moustaches, and, directing its steps apparently towards
  the Obukhoff bridge, disappeared in the darkness of the night.
</p>
<p>
  <a name="link2H_4_0018" id="link2H_4_0018">
  <!--  H2 anchor --> </a>
</p>
<div style="height: 4em;">
  <br /><br /><br /><br />
</div>
</section></body></html>