<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>St. John’s Eve</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="st-johns-eve" epub:type="chapter">

<h2>
  ST. JOHN&rsquo;S EVE
</h2>
<h3>
  A STORY TOLD BY THE SACRISTAN OF THE DIKANKA CHURCH
</h3>
<p>
  Thoma Grigroovitch had one very strange eccentricity: to the day of his
  death he never liked to tell the same thing twice. There were times when,
  if you asked him to relate a thing afresh, he would interpolate new
  matter, or alter it so that it was impossible to recognise it. Once upon a
  time, one of those gentlemen who, like the usurers at our yearly fairs,
  clutch and beg and steal every sort of frippery, and issue mean little
  volumes, no thicker than an A B C book, every month, or even every week,
  wormed this same story out of Thoma Grigorovitch, and the latter
  completely forgot about it. But that same young gentleman, in the
  pea-green caftan, came from Poltava, bringing with him a little book, and,
  opening it in the middle, showed it to us. Thoma Grigorovitch was on the
  point of setting his spectacles astride of his nose, but recollected that
  he had forgotten to wind thread about them and stick them together with
  wax, so he passed it over to me. As I understand nothing about reading and
  writing, and do not wear spectacles, I undertook to read it. I had not
  turned two leaves when all at once he caught me by the hand and stopped
  me.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Stop! tell me first what you are reading.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  I confess that I was a trifle stunned by such a question.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;What! what am I reading, Thoma Grigorovitch? Why, your own words.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Who told you that they were my words?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Why, what more would you have? Here it is printed: &lsquo;Related by such and
  such a sacristan.&rsquo;&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Spit on the head of the man who printed that! he lies, the dog of a
  Moscow pedlar! Did I say that? &lsquo;&rsquo;Twas just the same as though one hadn&rsquo;t
  his wits about him!&rsquo; Listen. I&rsquo;ll tell the tale to you on the spot.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  We moved up to the table, and he began.
</p>
<hr />
<p>
  My grandfather (the kingdom of heaven be his! may he eat only wheaten
  rolls and poppy-seed cakes with honey in the other world!) could tell a
  story wonderfully well. When he used to begin a tale you could not stir
  from the spot all day, but kept on listening. He was not like the
  story-teller of the present day, when he begins to lie, with a tongue as
  though he had had nothing to eat for three days, so that you snatch your
  cap and flee from the house. I remember my old mother was alive then, and
  in the long winter evenings when the frost was crackling out of doors, and
  had sealed up hermetically the narrow panes of our cottage, she used to
  sit at her wheel, drawing out a long thread in her hand, rocking the
  cradle with her foot, and humming a song, which I seem to hear even now.
</p>
<p>
  The lamp, quivering and flaring up as though in fear of something, lighted
  up our cottage; the spindle hummed; and all of us children, collected in a
  cluster, listened to grandfather, who had not crawled off the stove for
  more than five years, owing to his great age. But the wondrous tales of
  the incursions of the Zaporozhian Cossacks and the Poles, the bold deeds
  of Podkova, of Poltar-Kozhukh, and Sagaidatchnii, did not interest us so
  much as the stories about some deed of old which always sent a shiver
  through our frames and made our hair rise upright on our heads. Sometimes
  such terror took possession of us in consequence of them, that, from that
  evening forward, Heaven knows how wonderful everything seemed to us. If
  one chanced to go out of the cottage after nightfall for anything, one
  fancied that a visitor from the other world had lain down to sleep in
  one&rsquo;s bed; and I have often taken my own smock, at a distance, as it lay
  at the head of the bed, for the Evil One rolled up into a ball! But the
  chief thing about grandfather&rsquo;s stories was, that he never lied in all his
  life; and whatever he said was so, was so.
</p>
<p>
  I will now tell you one of his wonderful tales. I know that there are a
  great many wise people who copy in the courts, and can even read civil
  documents, but who, if you were to put into their hand a simple
  prayer-book, could not make out the first letter in it, and would show all
  their teeth in derision. These people laugh at everything you tell them.
  Along comes one of them&mdash;and doesn&rsquo;t believe in witches! Yes, glory
  to God that I have lived so long in the world! I have seen heretics to
  whom it would be easier to lie in confession than it would be to our
  brothers and equals to take snuff, and these folk would deny the existence
  of witches! But let them just dream about something, and they won&rsquo;t even
  tell what it was! There, it is no use talking about them!
</p>
<p>
  No one could have recognised the village of ours a little over a hundred
  years ago; it was a hamlet, the poorest kind of a hamlet. Half a score of
  miserable farmhouses, unplastered and badly thatched, were scattered here
  and there about the fields. There was not a yard or a decent shed to
  shelter animals or waggons. That was the way the wealthy lived: and if you
  had looked for our brothers, the poor&mdash;why, a hole in the ground&mdash;that
  was a cabin for you! Only by the smoke could you tell that a God-created
  man lived there. You ask why they lived so? It was not entirely through
  poverty: almost every one led a raiding Cossack life, and gathered not a
  little plunder in foreign lands; it was rather because it was little use
  building up a good wooden house. Many folk were engaged in raids all over
  the country&mdash;Crimeans, Poles, Lithuanians! It was quite possible that
  their own countrymen might make a descent and plunder everything. Anything
  was possible.
</p>
<p>
  In this hamlet a man, or rather a devil in human form, often made his
  appearance. Why he came, and whence, no one knew. He prowled about, got
  drunk, and suddenly disappeared as if into the air, leaving no trace of
  his existence. Then, behold, he seemed to have dropped from the sky again,
  and went flying about the street of the village, of which no trace now
  remains, and which was not more than a hundred paces from Dikanka. He
  would collect together all the Cossacks he met; then there were songs,
  laughter, and cash in plenty, and vodka flowed like water.... He would
  address the pretty girls, and give them ribbons, earrings, strings of
  beads&mdash;more than they knew what to do with. It is true that the
  pretty girls rather hesitated about accepting his presents: God knows,
  perhaps, what unclean hands they had passed through. My grandfather&rsquo;s
  aunt, who kept at that time a tavern, in which Basavriuk (as they called
  this devil-man) often caroused, said that no consideration on the earth
  would have induced her to accept a gift from him. But then, again, how
  avoid accepting? Fear seized on every one when he knit his shaggy brows,
  and gave a sidelong glance which might send your feet God knows whither:
  whilst if you did accept, then the next night some fiend from the swamp,
  with horns on his head, came and began to squeeze your neck, if there was
  a string of beads upon it; or bite your finger, if there was a ring upon
  it; or drag you by the hair, if ribbons were braided in it. God have
  mercy, then, on those who held such gifts! But here was the difficulty: it
  was impossible to get rid of them; if you threw them into the water, the
  diabolical ring or necklace would skim along the surface and into your
  hand.
</p>
<p>
  There was a church in the village&mdash;St. Pantelei, if I remember
  rightly. There lived there a priest, Father Athanasii of blessed memory.
  Observing that Basavriuk did not come to church, even at Easter, he
  determined to reprove him and impose penance upon him. Well, he hardly
  escaped with his life. &ldquo;Hark ye, sir!&rdquo; he thundered in reply, &ldquo;learn to
  mind your own business instead of meddling in other people&rsquo;s, if you don&rsquo;t
  want that throat of yours stuck with boiling kutya (1).&rdquo; What was to be
  done with this unrepentant man? Father Athanasii contented himself with
  announcing that any one who should make the acquaintance of Basavriuk
  would be counted a Catholic, an enemy of Christ&rsquo;s orthodox church, not a
  member of the human race.
</p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
(1) A dish of rice or wheat flour, with honey and raisins, which is
brought to the church on the celebration of memorial masses.
</pre>
<p>
  In this village there was a Cossack named Korzh, who had a labourer whom
  people called Peter the Orphan&mdash;perhaps because no one remembered
  either his father or mother. The church elder, it is true, said that they
  had died of the pest in his second year; but my grandfather&rsquo;s aunt would
  not hear of that, and tried with all her might to furnish him with
  parents, although poor Peter needed them about as much as we need last
  year&rsquo;s snow. She said that his father had been in Zaporozhe, and had been
  taken prisoner by the Turks, amongst whom he underwent God only knows what
  tortures, until having, by some miracle, disguised himself as a eunuch, he
  made his escape. Little cared the black-browed youths and maidens about
  Peter&rsquo;s parents. They merely remarked, that if he only had a new coat, a
  red sash, a black lambskin cap with a smart blue crown on his head, a
  Turkish sabre by his side, a whip in one hand and a pipe with handsome
  mountings in the other, he would surpass all the young men. But the pity
  was, that the only thing poor Peter had was a grey gaberdine with more
  holes in it than there are gold pieces in a Jew&rsquo;s pocket. But that was not
  the worst of it. Korzh had a daughter, such a beauty as I think you can
  hardly have chanced to see. My grandfather&rsquo;s aunt used to say&mdash;and
  you know that it is easier for a woman to kiss the Evil One than to call
  any one else a beauty&mdash;that this Cossack maiden&rsquo;s cheeks were as
  plump and fresh as the pinkest poppy when, bathed in God&rsquo;s dew, it unfolds
  its petals, and coquets with the rising sun; that her brows were evenly
  arched over her bright eyes like black cords, such as our maidens buy
  nowadays, for their crosses and ducats, off the Moscow pedlars who visit
  the villages with their baskets; that her little mouth, at sight of which
  the youths smacked their lips, seemed made to warble the songs of
  nightingales; that her hair, black as the raven&rsquo;s wing, and soft as young
  flax, fell in curls over her shoulders, for our maidens did not then plait
  their hair in pigtails interwoven with pretty, bright-hued ribbons. Eh!
  may I never intone another alleluia in the choir, if I would not have
  kissed her, in spite of the grey which is making its way through the old
  wool which covers my pate, and of the old woman beside me, like a thorn in
  my side! Well, you know what happens when young men and maidens live side
  by side. In the twilight the heels of red boots were always visible in the
  place where Pidorka chatted with her Peter. But Korzh would never have
  suspected anything out of the way, only one day&mdash;it is evident that
  none but the Evil One could have inspired him&mdash;Peter took into his
  head to kiss the maiden&rsquo;s rosy lips with all his heart, without first
  looking well about him; and that same Evil One&mdash;may the son of a dog
  dream of the holy cross!&mdash;caused the old grey-beard, like a fool, to
  open the cottage door at that same moment. Korzh was petrified, dropped
  his jaw, and clutched at the door for support. Those unlucky kisses
  completely stunned him.
</p>
<p>
  Recovering himself, he took his grandfather&rsquo;s hunting whip from the wall,
  and was about to belabour Peter&rsquo;s back with it, when Pidorka&rsquo;s little
  six-year-old brother Ivas rushed up from somewhere or other, and, grasping
  his father&rsquo;s legs with his little hands, screamed out, &ldquo;Daddy, daddy!
  don&rsquo;t beat Peter!&rdquo; What was to be done? A father&rsquo;s heart is not made of
  stone. Hanging the whip again on the wall, he led Peter quietly from the
  house. &ldquo;If you ever show yourself in my cottage again, or even under the
  windows, look out, Peter, for, by heaven, your black moustache will
  disappear; and your black locks, though wound twice about your ears, will
  take leave of your pate, or my name is not Terentiy Korzh.&rdquo; So saying, he
  gave him such a taste of his fist in the nape of his neck, that all grew
  dark before Peter, and he flew headlong out of the place.
</p>
<p>
  So there was an end of their kissing. Sorrow fell upon our turtle doves;
  and a rumour grew rife in the village that a certain Pole, all embroidered
  with gold, with moustaches, sabre, spurs, and pockets jingling like the
  bells of the bag with which our sacristan Taras goes through the church
  every day, had begun to frequent Korzh&rsquo;s house. Now, it is well known why
  a father has visitors when there is a black-browed daughter about. So, one
  day, Pidorka burst into tears, and caught the hand of her brother Ivas.
  &ldquo;Ivas, my dear! Ivas, my love! fly to Peter, my child of gold, like an
  arrow from a bow. Tell him all: I would have loved his brown eyes, I would
  have kissed his fair face, but my fate decrees otherwise. More than one
  handkerchief have I wet with burning tears. I am sad and heavy at heart.
  And my own father is my enemy. I will not marry the Pole, whom I do not
  love. Tell him they are making ready for a wedding, but there will be no
  music at our wedding: priests will sing instead of pipes and viols. I
  shall not dance with my bridegroom: they will carry me out. Dark, dark
  will be my dwelling of maple wood; and, instead of chimneys, a cross will
  stand upon the roof.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  Peter stood petrified, without moving from the spot, when the innocent
  child lisped out Pidorka&rsquo;s words to him. &ldquo;And I, wretched man, had thought
  to go to the Crimea and Turkey, to win gold and return to thee, my beauty!
  But it may not be. We have been overlooked by the evil eye. I too shall
  have a wedding, dear one; but no ecclesiastics will be present at that
  wedding. The black crow instead of the pope will caw over me; the bare
  plain will be my dwelling; the dark blue cloud my roof-tree. The eagle
  will claw out my brown eyes: the rain will wash my Cossack bones, and the
  whirlwinds dry them. But what am I? Of what should I complain? &lsquo;Tis clear
  God willed it so. If I am to be lost, then so be it!&rdquo; and he went straight
  to the tavern.
</p>
<p>
  My late grandfather&rsquo;s aunt was somewhat surprised at seeing Peter at the
  tavern, at an hour when good men go to morning mass; and stared at him as
  though in a dream when he called for a jug of brandy, about half a
  pailful. But the poor fellow tried in vain to drown his woe. The vodka
  stung his tongue like nettles, and tasted more bitter than wormwood. He
  flung the jug from him upon the ground.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;You have sorrowed enough, Cossack,&rdquo; growled a bass voice behind him. He
  looked round&mdash;it was Basavriuk! Ugh, what a face! His hair was like a
  brush, his eyes like those of a bull. &ldquo;I know what you lack: here it is.&rdquo;
   As he spoke he jingled a leather purse which hung from his girdle and
  smiled diabolically. Peter shuddered. &ldquo;Ha, ha, ha! how it shines!&rdquo; he
  roared, shaking out ducats into his hands: &ldquo;ha, ha, ha! how it jingles!
  And I only ask one thing for a whole pile of such shiners.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;It is the Evil One!&rdquo; exclaimed Peter. &ldquo;Give me them! I&rsquo;m ready for
  anything!&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  They struck hands upon it, and Basavriuk said, &ldquo;You are just in time,
  Peter: to-morrow is St. John the Baptist&rsquo;s day. Only on this one night in
  the year does the fern blossom. I will await you at midnight in the Bear&rsquo;s
  ravine.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  I do not believe that chickens await the hour when the housewife brings
  their corn with as much anxiety as Peter awaited the evening. He kept
  looking to see whether the shadows of the trees were not lengthening,
  whether the sun was not turning red towards setting; and, the longer he
  watched, the more impatient he grew. How long it was! Evidently, God&rsquo;s day
  had lost its end somewhere. But now the sun has set. The sky is red only
  on one side, and it is already growing dark. It grows colder in the
  fields. It gets gloomier and gloomier, and at last quite dark. At last!
  With heart almost bursting from his bosom, he set out and cautiously made
  his way down through the thick woods into the deep hollow called the
  Bear&rsquo;s ravine. Basavriuk was already waiting there. It was so dark that
  you could not see a yard before you. Hand in hand they entered the ravine,
  pushing through the luxuriant thorn-bushes and stumbling at almost every
  step. At last they reached an open spot. Peter looked about him: he had
  never chanced to come there before. Here Basavriuk halted.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Do you see before you three hillocks? There are a great many kinds of
  flowers upon them. May some power keep you from plucking even one of them.
  But as soon as the fern blossoms, seize it, and look not round, no matter
  what may seem to be going on behind thee.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  Peter wanted to ask some questions, but behold Basavriuk was no longer
  there. He approached the three hillocks&mdash;where were the flowers? He
  saw none. The wild steppe-grass grew all around, and hid everything in its
  luxuriance. But the lightning flashed; and before him was a whole bed of
  flowers, all wonderful, all strange: whilst amongst them there were also
  the simple fronds of fern. Peter doubted his senses, and stood
  thoughtfully before them, arms akimbo.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;What manner of prodigy is this? why, one can see these weeds ten times a
  day. What is there marvellous about them? Devil&rsquo;s face must be mocking
  me!&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  But behold! the tiny flower-bud of the fern reddened and moved as though
  alive. It was a marvel in truth. It grew larger and larger, and glowed
  like a burning coal. The tiny stars of light flashed up, something burst
  softly, and the flower opened before his eyes like a flame, lighting the
  others about it.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Now is the time,&rdquo; thought Peter, and extended his hand. He saw hundreds
  of hairy hands reach also for the flower from behind him, and there was a
  sound of scampering in his rear. He half closed his eyes, and plucked
  sharply at the stalk, and the flower remained in his hand.
</p>
<p>
  All became still.
</p>
<p>
  Upon a stump sat Basavriuk, quite blue like a corpse. He did not move so
  much as a finger. Hi eyes were immovably fixed on something visible to him
  alone; his mouth was half open and speechless. Nothing stirred around.
  Ugh! it was horrible! But then a whistle was heard which made Peter&rsquo;s
  heart grow cold within him; and it seemed to him that the grass whispered,
  and the flowers began to talk among themselves in delicate voices, like
  little silver bells, while the trees rustled in murmuring contention;&mdash;Basavriuk&rsquo;s
  face suddenly became full of life, and his eyes sparkled. &ldquo;The witch has
  just returned,&rdquo; he muttered between his teeth. &ldquo;Hearken, Peter: a charmer
  will stand before you in a moment; do whatever she commands; if not&mdash;you
  are lost forever.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  Then he parted the thorn-bushes with a knotty stick and before him stood a
  tiny farmhouse. Basavriuk smote it with his fist, and the wall trembled. A
  large black dog ran out to meet them, and with a whine transformed itself
  into a cat and flew straight at his eyes.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Don&rsquo;t be angry, don&rsquo;t be angry, you old Satan!&rdquo; said Basavriuk, employing
  such words as would have made a good man stop his ears. Behold, instead of
  a cat, an old woman all bent into a bow, with a face wrinkled like a baked
  apple, and a nose and chin like a pair of nutcrackers.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;A fine charmer!&rdquo; thought Peter; and cold chills ran down his back. The
  witch tore the flower from his hand, stooped and muttered over it for a
  long time, sprinkling it with some kind of water. Sparks flew from her
  mouth, and foam appeared on her lips.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Throw it away,&rdquo; she said, giving it back to Peter.
</p>
<p>
  Peter threw it, but what wonder was this? The flower did not fall straight
  to the earth, but for a long while twinkled like a fiery ball through the
  darkness, and swam through the air like a boat. At last it began to sink
  lower and lower, and fell so far away that the little star, hardly larger
  than a poppy-seed, was barely visible. &ldquo;There!&rdquo; croaked the old woman, in
  a dull voice: and Basavriuk, giving him a spade, said, &ldquo;Dig here, Peter:
  you will find more gold than you or Korzh ever dreamed of.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  Peter spat on his hands, seized the spade, pressed his foot on it, and
  turned up the earth, a second, a third, a fourth time. The spade clinked
  against something hard, and would go no further. Then his eyes began to
  distinguish a small, iron-bound coffer. He tried to seize it; but the
  chest began to sink into the earth, deeper, farther, and deeper still:
  whilst behind him he heard a laugh like a serpent&rsquo;s hiss.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;No, you shall not have the gold until you shed human blood,&rdquo; said the
  witch, and she led up to him a child of six, covered with a white sheet,
  and indicated by a sign that he was to cut off his head.
</p>
<p>
  Peter was stunned. A trifle, indeed, to cut off a man&rsquo;s, or even an
  innocent child&rsquo;s, head for no reason whatever! In wrath he tore off the
  sheet enveloping the victim&rsquo;s head, and behold! before him stood Ivas. The
  poor child crossed his little hands, and hung his head. Peter flew at the
  witch with the knife like a madman, and was on the point of laying hands
  on her.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;What did you promise for the girl?&rdquo; thundered Basavriuk; and like a shot
  he was on his back. The witch stamped her foot: a blue flame flashed from
  the earth and illumined all within it. The earth became transparent as if
  moulded of crystal; and all that was within it became visible, as if in
  the palm of the hand. Ducats, precious stones in chests and pots, were
  piled in heaps beneath the very spot they stood on. Peter&rsquo;s eyes flashed,
  his mind grew troubled.... He grasped the knife like a madman, and the
  innocent blood spurted into his eyes. Diabolical laughter resounded on all
  sides. Misshapen monsters flew past him in flocks. The witch, fastening
  her hands in the headless trunk, like a wolf, drank its blood. His head
  whirled. Collecting all his strength, he set out to run. Everything grew
  red before him. The trees seemed steeped in blood, and burned and groaned.
  The sky glowed and threatened. Burning points, like lightning, flickered
  before his eyes. Utterly exhausted, he rushed into his miserable hovel and
  fell to the ground like a log. A death-like sleep overpowered him.
</p>
<p>
  Two days and two nights did Peter sleep, without once awakening. When he
  came to himself, on the third day, he looked long at all the corners of
  his hut, but in vain did he endeavour to recollect what had taken place;
  his memory was like a miser&rsquo;s pocket, from which you cannot entice a
  quarter of a kopek. Stretching himself, he heard something clash at his
  feet. He looked, there were two bags of gold. Then only, as if in a dream,
  he recollected that he had been seeking for treasure, and that something
  had frightened him in the woods.
</p>
<p>
  Korzh saw the sacks&mdash;and was mollified. &ldquo;A fine fellow, Peter, quite
  unequalled! yes, and did I not love him? Was he not to me as my own son?&rdquo;
   And the old fellow repeated this fiction until he wept over it himself.
  Pidorka began to tell Peter how some passing gipsies had stolen Ivas; but
  he could not even recall him&mdash;to such a degree had the Devil&rsquo;s
  influence darkened his mind! There was no reason for delay. The Pole was
  dismissed, and the wedding-feast prepared; rolls were baked, towels and
  handkerchiefs embroidered; the young people were seated at table; the
  wedding-loaf was cut; guitars, cymbals, pipes, viols sounded, and pleasure
  was rife.
</p>
<p>
  A wedding in the olden times was not like one of the present day. My
  grandfather&rsquo;s aunt used to tell how the maidens&mdash;in festive
  head-dresses of yellow, blue, and pink ribbons, above which they bound
  gold braid; in thin chemisettes embroidered on all the seams with red
  silk, and strewn with tiny silver flowers; in morocco shoes, with high
  iron heels&mdash;danced the gorlitza as swimmingly as peacocks, and as
  wildly as the whirlwind; how the youths&mdash;with their ship-shaped caps
  upon their heads, the crowns of gold brocade, and two horns projecting,
  one in front and another behind, of the very finest black lambskin; in
  tunics of the finest blue silk with red borders&mdash;stepped forward one
  by one, their arms akimbo in stately form, and executed the gopak; how the
  lads&mdash;in tall Cossack caps, and light cloth gaberdines, girt with
  silver embroidered belts, their short pipes in their teeth&mdash;skipped
  before them and talked nonsense. Even Korzh as he gazed at the young
  people could not help getting gay in his old age. Guitar in hand,
  alternately puffing at his pipe and singing, a brandy-glass upon his head,
  the greybeard began the national dance amid loud shouts from the
  merry-makers.
</p>
<p>
  What will not people devise in merry mood? They even began to disguise
  their faces till they did not look like human beings. On such occasions
  one would dress himself as a Jew, another as the Devil: they would begin
  by kissing each other, and end by seizing each other by the hair. God be
  with them! you laughed till you held your sides. They dressed themselves
  in Turkish and Tatar garments. All upon them glowed like a conflagration,
  and then they began to joke and play pranks....
</p>
<p>
  An amusing thing happened to my grandfather&rsquo;s aunt, who was at this
  wedding. She was wearing an ample Tatar robe, and, wine-glass in hand, was
  entertaining the company. The Evil One instigated one man to pour vodka
  over her from behind. Another, at the same moment, evidently not by
  accident, struck a light, and held it to her. The flame flashed up, and
  poor aunt, in terror, flung her dress off, before them all. Screams,
  laughter, jests, arose as if at a fair. In a word, the old folks could not
  recall so merry a wedding.
</p>
<p>
  Pidorka and Peter began to live like a gentleman and lady. There was
  plenty of everything and everything was fine.... But honest folk shook
  their heads when they marked their way of living. &ldquo;From the Devil no good
  can come,&rdquo; they unanimously agreed. &ldquo;Whence, except from the tempter of
  orthodox people, came this wealth? Where else could he have got such a lot
  of gold from? Why, on the very day that he got rich, did Basavriuk vanish
  as if into thin air?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  Say, if you can, that people only imagine things! A month had not passed,
  and no one would have recognised Peter. He sat in one spot, saying no word
  to any one; but continually thinking and seemingly trying to recall
  something. When Pidorka succeeded in getting him to speak, he appeared to
  forget himself, and would carry on a conversation, and even grow cheerful;
  but if he inadvertently glanced at the sacks, &ldquo;Stop, stop! I have
  forgotten,&rdquo; he would cry, and again plunge into reverie and strive to
  recall something. Sometimes when he sat still a long time in one place, it
  seemed to him as though it were coming, just coming back to mind, but
  again all would fade away. It seemed as if he was sitting in the tavern:
  they brought him vodka; vodka stung him; vodka was repulsive to him. Some
  one came along and struck him on the shoulder; but beyond that everything
  was veiled in darkness before him. The perspiration would stream down his
  face, and he would sit exhausted in the same place.
</p>
<p>
  What did not Pirdorka do? She consulted the sorceresses; and they poured
  out fear, and brewed stomach ache (2)&mdash;but all to no avail. And so
  the summer passed. Many a Cossack had mowed and reaped; many a Cossack,
  more enterprising than the rest, had set off upon an expedition. Flocks of
  ducks were already crowding the marshes, but there was not even a hint of
  improvement.
</p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
(2) &ldquo;To pour out fear&rdquo; refers to a practice resorted to in case of
fear. When it is desired to know what caused this, melted lead or
wax is poured into water, and the object whose form it assumes is
the one which frightened the sick person; after this, the fear
departs. Sonyashnitza is brewed for giddiness and pain in the
bowels. To this end, a bit of stump is burned, thrown into a jug,
and turned upside down into a bowl filled with water, which is
placed on the patient&rsquo;s stomach: after an incantation, he is given
a spoonful of this water to drink.
</pre>
<p>
  It was red upon the steppes. Ricks of grain, like Cossack&rsquo;s caps, dotted
  the fields here and there. On the highway were to be encountered waggons
  loaded with brushwood and logs. The ground had become more solid, and in
  places was touched with frost. Already had the snow begun to fall and the
  branches of the trees were covered with rime like rabbit-skin. Already on
  frosty days the robin redbreast hopped about on the snow-heaps like a
  foppish Polish nobleman, and picked out grains of corn; and children, with
  huge sticks, played hockey upon the ice; while their fathers lay quietly
  on the stove, issuing forth at intervals with lighted pipes in their lips,
  to growl, in regular fashion, at the orthodox frost, or to take the air,
  and thresh the grain spread out in the barn. At last the snow began to
  melt, and the ice slipped away: but Peter remained the same; and, the more
  time went on, the more morose he grew. He sat in the cottage as though
  nailed to the spot, with the sacks of gold at his feet. He grew averse to
  companionship, his hair grew long, he became terrible to look at; and
  still he thought of but one thing, still he tried to recall something, and
  got angry and ill-tempered because he could not. Often, rising wildly from
  his seat, he gesticulated violently and fixed his eyes on something as
  though desirous of catching it: his lips moving as though desirous of
  uttering some long-forgotten word, but remaining speechless. Fury would
  take possession of him: he would gnaw and bite his hands like a man half
  crazy, and in his vexation would tear out his hair by the handful, until,
  calming down, he would relapse into forgetfulness, as it were, and then
  would again strive to recall the past and be again seized with fury and
  fresh tortures. What visitation of God was this?
</p>
<p>
  Pidorka was neither dead not alive. At first it was horrible for her to
  remain alone with him in the cottage; but, in course of time, the poor
  woman grew accustomed to her sorrow. But it was impossible to recognise
  the Pidorka of former days. No blushes, no smiles: she was thin and worn
  with grief, and had wept her bright eyes away. Once some one who took pity
  on her advised her to go to the witch who dwelt in the Bear&rsquo;s ravine, and
  enjoyed the reputation of being able to cure every disease in the world.
  She determined to try that last remedy: and finally persuaded the old
  woman to come to her. This was on St. John&rsquo;s Eve, as it chanced. Peter lay
  insensible on the bench, and did not observe the newcomer. Slowly he rose,
  and looked about him. Suddenly he trembled in every limb, as though he
  were on the scaffold: his hair rose upon his head, and he laughed a laugh
  that filled Pidorka&rsquo;s heart with fear.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;I have remembered, remembered!&rdquo; he cried, in terrible joy; and, swinging
  a hatchet round his head, he struck at the old woman with all his might.
  The hatchet penetrated the oaken door nearly four inches. The old woman
  disappeared; and a child of seven, covered in a white sheet, stood in the
  middle of the cottage.... The sheet flew off. &ldquo;Ivas!&rdquo; cried Pidorka, and
  ran to him; but the apparition became covered from head to foot with
  blood, and illumined the whole room with red light....
</p>
<p>
  She ran into the passage in her terror, but, on recovering herself a
  little, wished to help Peter. In vain! the door had slammed to behind her,
  so that she could not open it. People ran up, and began to knock: they
  broke in the door, as though there were but one mind among them. The whole
  cottage was full of smoke; and just in the middle, where Peter had stood,
  was a heap of ashes whence smoke was still rising. They flung themselves
  upon the sacks: only broken potsherds lay there instead of ducats. The
  Cossacks stood with staring eyes and open mouths, as if rooted to the
  earth, not daring to move a hair, such terror did this wonder inspire in
  them.
</p>
<p>
  I do not remember what happened next. Pidorka made a vow to go upon a
  pilgrimage, collected the property left her by her father, and in a few
  days it was as if she had never been in the village. Whither she had gone,
  no one could tell. Officious old women would have despatched her to the
  same place whither Peter had gone; but a Cossack from Kief reported that
  he had seen, in a cloister, a nun withered to a mere skeleton who prayed
  unceasingly. Her fellow-villagers recognised her as Pidorka by the tokens&mdash;that
  no one heard her utter a word; and that she had come on foot, and had
  brought a frame for the picture of God&rsquo;s mother, set with such brilliant
  stones that all were dazzled at the sight.
</p>
<p>
  But this was not the end, if you please. On the same day that the Evil One
  made away with Peter, Basavriuk appeared again; but all fled from him.
  They knew what sort of a being he was&mdash;none else than Satan, who had
  assumed human form in order to unearth treasures; and, since treasures do
  not yield to unclean hands, he seduced the young. That same year, all
  deserted their earthen huts and collected in a village; but even there
  there was no peace on account of that accursed Basavriuk.
</p>
<p>
  My late grandfather&rsquo;s aunt said that he was particularly angry with her
  because she had abandoned her former tavern, and tried with all his might
  to revenge himself upon her. Once the village elders were assembled in the
  tavern, and, as the saying goes, were arranging the precedence at the
  table, in the middle of which was placed a small roasted lamb, shame to
  say. They chattered about this, that, and the other&mdash;among the rest
  about various marvels and strange things. Well, they saw something; it
  would have been nothing if only one had seen it, but all saw it, and it
  was this: the sheep raised his head, his goggling eyes became alive and
  sparkled; and the black, bristling moustache, which appeared for one
  instant, made a significant gesture at those present. All at once
  recognised Basavriuk&rsquo;s countenance in the sheep&rsquo;s head; my grandfather&rsquo;s
  aunt thought it was on the point of asking for vodka. The worthy elders
  seized their hats and hastened home.
</p>
<p>
  Another time, the church elder himself, who was fond of an occasional
  private interview with my grandfather&rsquo;s brandy-glass, had not succeeded in
  getting to the bottom twice, when he beheld the glass bowing very low to
  him. &ldquo;Satan take you, let us make the sign of the cross over you!&rdquo;&mdash;And
  the same marvel happened to his better half. She had just begun to mix the
  dough in a huge kneading-trough when suddenly the trough sprang up. &ldquo;Stop,
  stop! where are you going?&rdquo; Putting its arms akimbo, with dignity, it went
  skipping all about the cottage&mdash;you may laugh, but it was no laughing
  matter to our grandfathers. And in vain did Father Athanasii go through
  all the village with holy water, and chase the Devil through all the
  streets with his brush. My late grandfather&rsquo;s aunt long complained that,
  as soon as it was dark, some one came knocking at her door and scratching
  at the wall.
</p>
<p>
  Well! All appears to be quiet now in the place where our village stands;
  but it was not so very long ago&mdash;my father was still alive&mdash;that
  I remember how a good man could not pass the ruined tavern which a
  dishonest race had long managed for their own interest. From the
  smoke-blackened chimneys smoke poured out in a pillar, and rising high in
  the air, rolled off like a cap, scattering burning coals over the steppe;
  and Satan (the son of a dog should not be mentioned) sobbed so pitifully
  in his lair that the startled ravens rose in flocks from the neighbouring
  oak-wood and flew through the air with wild cries.
</p>
<p>
  <a name="link2H_4_0017" id="link2H_4_0017">
  <!--  H2 anchor --> </a>
</p>
<div style="height: 4em;">
  <br /><br /><br /><br />
</div>
</section></body></html>
